                          ============
                          InstantTrack
                          Version 1.50
                          ============
                                
                                
   Satellite Tracking software for the IBM PC and compatibles.
                                
                                
                                
  Copyright 1989 - 2000 Franklin Antonio and Paul Williamson
  


(This document is also included in PDF format. If you can read
the PDF file instead of this plain text file, you will find this
document much easier to read. The PDF file is also more suitable
for printing.)



1. Introduction

InstantTrack was designed to assist amateur radio operators who
need to track a large number of Earth-orbiting satellites, point
antennas at them in real time, estimate when communications links
will be possible with operators in other parts of the world, etc.

InstantTrack is copyrighted software. See the copyright and
distribution information later in this document.

InstantTrack 1.00 introduced in 1989 several features that made
it unique among satellite tracking programs, and a few features
which, while not unique, were relatively uncommon among low cost
satellite tracking programs. While many of these features have
been added to other programs, no other program matches
InstantTrack's combination of speed, small size, ease of use, and
wide compatibility with many different computers.

I've taken the liberty of listing a few of these here.
     
     Speed -- InstantTrack is still faster than any other
          tracking program. Humans should never wait for
          computers. InstantTrack is fast even on ancient,
          slow computers.
     
     Ease of use -- Most commands are a single keystroke.
          Usually-tedious functions are fully automated.
     
     Automated orbital element entry -- InstantTrack reads
          the popular NASA and AMSAT format satellite
          element files and updates its database
          automatically. You need never again manually enter
          dozens of 10-digit numbers.
     
     Automated time setting -- InstantTrack automatically
          sets the time on your computer by accessing the
          NIST time service via your modem.
     
     Instant Visibility -- InstantTrack shows you the
          positions of your "favorite" satellites, even
          before you issue the first keystroke. The menu of
          200 satellites shows you which are visible from
          your location even before you select a satellite.
          The menu of 1794 cities shows you which cities are
          visible from the selected satellite even before
          you choose a city.
     
     Graphics -- InstantTrack displays color high resolution
          (EGA/VGA) maps of the Earth, showing satellite and
          observers position, two kinds of satellite
          footprint, grayline, etc. Two map projections are
          selectable. You can also select either a diagram
          of the satellite's orbit showing the orientation
          of the satellite, or a map of the sky, showing the
          satellite's position against the field of stars.
          
          You can move from map to map or satellite to
          satellite with a single keystroke, instantly.
     
     Large Number of Satellites & Stations -- InstantTrack
          maintains a database of 200 satellites and 50
          observer locations. A unique grouping feature al
          lows you to categorize satellites, and perform
          most operations on either a selected group, or the
          entire database.
     
     City Database -- InstantTrack includes a database of
          1794 cities worldwide. Locations of the satellite
          (sub-satellite points) and observers are displayed
          relative to the nearest city.  Observing stations
          can be specified by entering as little as their
          city name.
     
     Grid Squares -- InstantTrack understands the gridsquare
          system.  Observing stations can be specified by
          typing only their gridsquare.
     
     Satellite Covisibility -- InstantTrack shows you when
          satellites can see other satellites (i.e., when
          crosslinks are possible), when satellites are in
          eclipse (in the shadow of the Earth), etc. This
          display, of course, updates in real-time, so you
          can see crosslinks appear and disappear.
     
     Satellite Offpointing -- (sometimes called Squint
          Angle) InstantTrack computes the angle by which
          the satellite's antennas are pointed away from
          you, for two types of satellite stabilization
          system. Helps you understand why the quality of
          communications varies.
          
          InstantTrack's graphics show you where a
          satellite's antennas are pointing. Maps display a
          contour line of squint angle. Stations within this
          line have low squint, and typically can establish
          the best links via such satellites.
     
     Path Loss -- InstantTrack shows the path loss between
          your station and the satellite in real time.
     
     Schedules -- InstantTrack can show you the next three
          week's schedule for a satellite, or one day's
          schedule for 20 satellites or 4 observers on one
          easy-to-read screen.
     
     Realtime Rotor Control -- InstantTrack supports
          realtime antenna rotor control via the Kansas City
          Tracker interface or any interface with a
          compatible driver.
     
     Realtime Radio Control -- InstantTrack supports
          realtime transceiver control for Doppler
          compensation via a defined programming interface.
     
     Background Mode -- A unique background mode allows you
          to track satellites, point antennas, and tune
          radios in real time while you run other programs.
     
     Sun and Moon -- InstantTrack tracks the Sun and Moon as
          well as the satellites in its database.
     
     Fast Rise-Time Finder -- InstantTrack rapidly computes
          the time at which a satellite will rise over the
          horizon.
     
     Tracking Multiple Stations -- You can see the computed
          parameters (azimuth, elevation, squint, etc.) both
          from your perspective and from the perspective of
          the station at the other end of the satellite
          link.
     
     Documentation -- Extensive and Tutorial.
     
     Online Help -- InstantTrack contains a context-
          sensitive online help facility which can be
          entered from almost any screen.


1.1. Required Hardware

Any IBM PC, or AT, PS/2, clone, etc. with at least 512K memory,
running DOS or a compatible environment such as OS/2, Windows
3.1, Windows 95, Windows 98, Windows NT, or Windows 2000.

Any display type is OK for the text mode screens. Color maps
require EGA or VGA display. Minimal monochrome maps are supported
on HGC and CGA. I'm not particularly fond of the ancient CGA
boards; if you have one of those, beware that I have taken no
steps to avoid `CGA snow'.

A numeric coprocessor (8087 or 80287 or 80387) is NOT required,
but it is recommended. InstantTrack isn't really Instant on an
old computer without a coprocessor, but it will still probably be
faster at most things than any other tracking program. If you
have a Pentium or faster CPU, you have a numeric coprocessor
built-in and don't need to worry about it.

A mouse is NOT required, but can be used on the map screens.

Due to the large file sizes involved, a hard disk is recommended.


1.2. Getting Started

There are only three things you must do to get started:

1.   Set your time zone.

2.   Enter your station "elements", or location.

3.   Update the Keplerian elements database.

These procedures are described in the sections titled "Setting
Your Time zone", "Station Elements (Where Are You?)", and
"Satellite Elements (What Are The Orbits?)" which follow.

You then run one of the following two programs:
     
     IT     --  if your computer has an 8087, 80287, or 80387
                numeric co-processor, or uses a 486DX, Pentium,
                or any other modern Pentium-class CPU
     
     ITNCP  --  if your computer has an older processor and does
                NOT have a numeric co-processor (the letters NCP
                stand for No Co-Processor)

A few of you with unusual hardware configurations may need to set
a few more parameters. These are described in the file
ITINIDOC.TXT.

If InstantTrack's use of your mouse causes problems, you can tell
InstantTrack not to use the mouse by adding "/M" on the command
line. This can be helpful under certain older multitaskers.



2.The Main Menu Screen


The main menu is the first screen to appear when you fire up
InstantTrack. This screen is a simple menu which allows you to
pick among the basic functions that InstantTrack performs. Each
of these functions is described in a later section.

At the bottom of the main menu screen, there is a horizontal red
line, below which appear your present pointing angles
(azimuth/elevation) to up to seven selected satellites. The Sun
and Moon also appear if five or fewer satellites are selected.
Each pair of angles is displayed in yellow if the object is now
above your horizon, and green if it is below. (These colors are
consistent in displays throughout InstantTrack)

On very slow computers, it may take a couple of seconds for these
numbers to appear. On faster machines, they appear instantly. It
is important for you to realize that you do not have to wait for
these numbers to appear before making your menu selection. As
soon as you type a key, this program will jump instantly to the
desired function. That's how I've tried to make InstantTrack work
-- you almost never wait for anything.



3. Online Help Screens


InstantTrack contains a modest online help facility. Select Help
at the main menu (by typing "?") to get a menu of help screens,
or type ? while in any of the major function screens to jump
instantly to the help screens that describe that particular
function.

You may then navigate among the help pages using the PgUp and
PgDn keys.

Return from a help screen by typing Q or using the "Home" or
"Esc" key.

Using online help, you can almost use InstantTrack without this
manual. This is a great help when you need a quick answer, but
there's still no substitute for actually reading the manual.
You'd be surprised at the number of people who ask questions,
when the answer is right here in the manual.



4. Time and Timezones


InstantTrack must know time correctly, before it can locate
satellites correctly. The program reads your computer's DOS clock
(which it assumes is set to your local time zone). Local time is
then converted to UTC (Coordinated Universal Time, also known as
Greenwich Mean Time) which is used in the orbit calculations.

So, there are two requirements. First, you must set your
computer's DOS clock with reasonable accuracy. Second, you must
tell InstantTrack what time zone it is in.


4.1. How Accurate?

How accurately must you set your computer's DOS clock? The answer
depends on orbital mechanics and geometry. Assuming the goal is
to point an antenna at a satellite, we can determine how much
time error will produce a certain amount of antenna pointing
error. There are several sources of antenna pointing error of
course. Time error is just one contribution.

Low Earth Orbiting (LEO) satellites move the fastest, and
therefore require the most accurate time. Consider a satellite
orbiting at 250 km altitude. This is about as low as useful satel
lites go. The angles change fastest when the satellite is
directly overhead, so we'll compute that case.

Pointing error for 250km satellite directly overhead:

Time Error   Pointing Error
 1 second      1.8 degrees
10 seconds    17   degrees
 1 minute     61   degrees

This is a worst case! In most situations, time accurate to 30
seconds is probably fine.

There are several ways to set your computer's clock. You can do
it by hand, of course, getting time information from the phone
company, or WWV, or a GPS receiver. This works very well.

InstantTrack can also set your computer's clock for you by
accessing the National Institute of Standards & Technology
(formerly known as the National Bureau of Standards) telephone
time service. Your computer uses your modem to make a very quick
long-distance call to a modem at NIST. This feature is described
in more detail in a later section.

If your computer is connected to the Internet, you may want to
consider obtaining a program that sets your computer's clock
using Network Time Protocol (NTP) or Simple Network Time Protocol
(SNTP). This will allow your computer to keep its own clock set
automatically.


4.2. Setting Your Time Zone

There are two ways to tell InstantTrack your time zone:
     
     -    the DOS environment variable TZ
     
     -    in the IT.INI configuration file.
     

4.2.1. Setting Your Time Zone using TZ

You can tell InstantTrack the name of the local time zone by
setting a DOS environment variable called "TZ" (short for Time
Zone). This is the standard DOS method, and may have already been
done on your computer. You should put the command to set it in
your AUTOEXEC.BAT file, so that you never forget. You must set TZ
to your time zone by executing a DOS command like this:

     SET TZ=PST8PDT

The first three letters (PST in this case) are the name of a time
zone, followed by number indicating the number of hours
difference between UTC and your time zone, followed by an
optional three letter name of a daylight saving time timezone.
There must not be any spaces in this command, except the one
between "SET" and "TZ".

For Eastern Standard Time with Daylight Saving Time:
     
     SET TZ=EST5EDT

For Mountain Standard Time with Daylight Saving Time:
     
     SET TZ=MST7MDT

If you live in an area where daylight saving time is not used (or
where the rules are different from those in the U.S.), you should
leave off the last three letters. For example, if you live in
Arizona where they don't have Daylight Saving Time, you should
use:

     SET TZ=MST7

Or, if you live in Western Australia where they don't have
Daylight Saving Time, you should use:

     SET TZ=HST-8

Notice in the example above that the number can be negative. Use
negative numbers if your timezone is ahead of UTC. Use regular
positive numbers if your timezone is behind UTC. The number has
to be a whole number, though, so if your timezone is a half hour
or quarter hour off from UTC, see the next section.

In the U.S., Daylight Saving Time starts at 2 AM on the first
Sunday of April and ends at 2 AM on the last Sunday of October.
If you live someplace where Daylight Saving Time is used, but it
starts and ends on different dates, you must change your timezone
setting each spring and fall. For example, you might use:

     SET TZ=XST3

in the winter, and when summer comes around manually change this
to:

     SET TZ=XDT2

If you leave your DOS clock set to UTC (which doesn't have
Daylight Saving Time), then use
     
     SET TZ=UTC0

If you don't set TZ at all, it defaults to PST8PDT. Microsoft is
located in the Pacific time zone.

You can use any three-letter code you like for your timezone. For
example, if you think of your local time as "local time" instead
of "Pacific Standard Time", you can use

     SET TZ=LOC8LOC

if you find that easier to understand.

If you're running under Windows, you might think that setting the
Windows clock would take care of setting TZ automatically. It
really ought to, since that's the standard DOS way to tell
programs what timezone they're in. Unfortunately, Windows doesn't
do that, so you still have to make this setting manually.


4.2.2. Setting Your Time Zone using IT.INI

You can also tell InstantTrack the name of the local time zone by
setting a variable in the IT.INI configuration file. The setting
in IT.INI overrides the TZ environment variable.

You may want to use this method if:
     
     1.   Some other program wants to use the TZ environment variable
       differently, or
     
     2.   Your timezone is on a half hour or quarter hour offset from
       UTC, or
     
     3.   You just don't like to mess with environment variables.

If any of these applies to you, read the section in this document
on the IT.INI configuration file, and then read the file
ITINIDOC.TXT for details on how these settings should be used.


4.3. How Time is Displayed and Entered

Many InstantTrack screens display date and time. These dates and
times may be displayed as either UTC or local time. You get to
choose. Some users prefer to think in UTC, others become totally
confused trying to mentally convert back and forth between UTC
and local time. Most of us are somewhere in between.

When InstantTrack starts up, time display is in UTC. At any time
on most screens, you can type the "Z" command, which toggles the
time display mode between UTC and Local. (Z stands for Zone, as
in timezone.)

You can always tell which mode you're in. A realtime time display
appears at the top left corner of most screens, and it contains
the timezone name. For example, the time displayed might be
"03/01/92 06:22:37 UTC". If I then type Z, the display will
instantly become "02/29/92 23:22:37 PDT".

What about time entry? A few InstantTrack screens will prompt you
to enter a time. In most cases, you can just respond by typing
the Enter key. InstantTrack will accept this to mean "right now".
If you need to enter some other time, InstantTrack will accept
any of the following formats...

     mm/dd/yy hh:mm:ss   -- fully specified date & time
     mm/dd/yy hh:mm      -- seconds default to 00
     mm/dd/yy            -- time defaults to 00:00:00
     hh:mm:ss            -- day defaults to today
     hh:mm               -- and seconds default to 00

The examples above show a 2-digit year. That's all that you
normally need to type. For example 90 means 1990. IT will assume
that a 2-digit year is in the range [1950..2049], which is, of
course, what you normally want. You may type the full 4 digit
year if you wish.

You may also omit leading zeros. For example 3/2/89 22:0 is a
legal entry.

Time entry always assumes the same timezone as time display. In
other words, if you have InstantTrack displaying times in UTC, it
assumes you will enter times in UTC.



5. Station Elements (Where Are You?)


To tell InstantTrack where you are located, or where your friends
are located, select "Housekeeping Functions" (by typing the 6
key) at the main menu. Then select "Update Station Elements" (by
typing the B key) at the Housekeeping Menu.

You will then be presented with a "Station Selection Menu".
InstantTrack contains a database which remembers the locations of
up to 50 stations. The first station (station #1) in this
database is special. InstantTrack expects the first station to be
where YOU are located. The other 49 entries can be used to
specify the location of stations you often communicate with.

The parameters of the stations you enter in the station database
will be saved on disk (in the file IT.QTH), and will be available
next time you run InstantTrack. The program also understands the
concept of a "visiting station". A visiting station is one you
may want to define for the moment, but which does not get entered
into the permanent database. More about visitors later.

Pick a station to edit. The first time you run InstantTrack, you
should edit station #1 so that it represents your station's
location. Type the number of the station you picked, then hit
Enter.

The "Edit Station Elements" screen will appear, and the present
station name, latitude, longitude, and elevation above sea level
will be displayed. Some computed information is also displayed to
help you verify that you've entered your station location
correctly.

Editing station data is simple. Use up-arrow and down-arrow keys
to move the cursor to the line you want to change. To change a
value, type the = key followed by the new value. Type the Enter
key to enter the value.

To exit this screen, type the Q key. (Most screens in
InstantTrack exit when you type the Q key. Q stands for Quit.)

Latitude is entered in degrees North or South. Longitude are
entered in degrees East or West. (Not degrees:minutes:seconds).
Latitude must be in the range [90N,90S]. Longitude must be in the
range [180E,180W]. You may indicate North, South, East, or West
by typing N, S, E, or W after the number, or you may use negative
numbers for South and East. Positive numbers are assumed to be
North or West. (Many other programs consider East to be positive.
Don't let that confuse you. Just use the letter E or W and you'll
be safe.)

Be careful if you have a latitude or longitude specified in
degrees, minutes, and seconds. It must be converted to degrees
before you type it in. Use this formula:

     decimal degrees = degrees + (minutes/60) + (seconds/3600)

Altitude is measured in meters above sea-level.

You should try to find your latitude and longitude to at least
two places after the decimal point. Altitude is not nearly so
important; you can guess. The US Geological Survey publishes
detailed maps of the entire US, which show latitude, longitude,
and altitude to the required accuracy. You can usually find these
maps at your local major University library or a map store. You
can also find your location by using a GPS receiver.

You can also type the D key (for Delete) on this screen. This
deletes the current station settings, so this station will no
longer appear on the station menu.



6. Satellite Elements (What Are The Orbits?)


Satellite Orbital Elements are numbers that tell us the orbit of
each satellite. Elements for common satellites are distributed
through the Internet, on amateur packet radio bulletin boards,
and other means.

InstantTrack comes with elements for many satellites already
defined, but these elements are probably out of date by the time
you install InstantTrack. You can update these elements by
telling InstantTrack to read in files containing new elements, or
by entering elements manually. InstantTrack can read satellite
element files in two common formats.

Entering satellite elements is easy. Understanding them is a bit
more difficult. I have tried to make the section titled
"Understanding Satellite Elements" as easy to read as possible.
Luckily, you don't need to understand the elements in order to
load and use them.

In addition to the "classical" Orbital Elements, InstantTrack's
satellite database contains several other pieces of information
about each satellite (schedule, beacon frequency, etc.). These
are stored in the same database, and edited the same way that the
orbital elements are edited. They're described in a separate
section below, titled "Understanding Satellite Parameters".


6.1. Entering Satellite Elements

Satellite elements are widely distributed on the Internet and via
Amateur Radio bulletin boards of both the telephone and the
packet radio varieties. Many amateurs involved in satellite
operation have tuned in to one of these sources. These sources
have a tremendous advantage over printed sources such as AMSAT
newsletters, because the elements are available in computer-
readable form. Here are a few sources to try:

     http://www.amsat.org/amsat/keps/
     http://www.celestrak.com

There are two common formats in which orbital elements are
distributed. These are called the "NASA" and "AMSAT" formats.
NASA format files are also called "NORAD" and "2-line" format
files. Both are ASCII text files that can be read by both humans
and computers, although the NASA format is difficult for humans
to read. InstantTrack can read either format, or any combination
of the two. Ideally, you will find a source for elements in
computer-readable form, and never be forced to type in elements
by hand.

To enter satellite elements, select "Housekeeping Functions" on
the main menu. Then select "Update Satellite Elements" on the
Housekeeping Menu. This will take you to the Update Satellite
Elements menu. Here you can choose from a variety of satellite
database update functions:

     1. ALL:  Read in elements for ALL satellites in file.
     2. ONE:  Read in elements for ONE specific satellite.
     3. UPDATE:    Read in elements for ALL satellites EXCEPT those
              for which the program already has newer elements.
     4. OLD:  Delete satellites with old orbital elements.
     5. CRASH:Delete satellites that have crashed.
     6. DELETE:    Delete a satellite manually.
     7. SQUISH:    Compact the satellite elements database.
     8. EDIT: View / Edit satellite elements by hand.

These functions are described below.

6.1.1. Automatic Satellite Element Entry

In most cases, you will probably specify option 3. Under option
3, as InstantTrack reads in elements for each satellite, it
compares the Epoch (that is, effective time) of the element set
in the database to the Epoch of the element set in the file. The
element set from the file is only read in if its Epoch is later
than the Epoch of the element set you already have.

There are some interesting cases where you may wish to update
only the elements for one particular satellite (option 2). For
example, shortly after OSCAR 13 was launched, an incorrect NASA
element set was widely distributed. If you load new elements,
then find that the orbit for one satellite is fouled up, you can
use this feature to recover an older set of elements for that
satellite (assuming you have kept the element files around).

You will be asked the name of the file you want to read. The file
can be in NASA 2-line format, or in AMSAT verbose format, or any
combination of the two. Type in the name of the file you
downloaded. If the file is on a different drive or in a different
directory than the one you ran InstantTrack from, you'll need to
specify the complete path. If you're running under OS/2 or
Windows, remember that InstantTrack is a DOS program and can only
understand filenames and path names that are up to eight
characters, plus optionally a dot and up to three more
characters. Spaces are not allowed in DOS filenames.

If you specify a filename on a floppy disk (like A:\PLAN.OUT) and
you get one of those annoying "Abort, Retry, Fail?" errors, you
can choose any of the three reponses. If you choose Abort (by
typing "A"), InstantTrack will immediately exit. If that's not
what you want, you should probably choose Fail instead (by typing
"F"). In that case, InstantTrack will tell you it failed (but you
knew that already) and ask for a new filename. If you can correct
the problem (such as by inserting a floppy disk), do so and
choose Retry (by typing "R"). If things are now working,
InstantTrack will pick up and continue as if nothing had gone
wrong.

Examples of the file formats can be found in an appendix at the
end of this document. InstantTrack doesn't care about extra stuff
at the beginning or end of the file, or even between sets of
elements, but it is fairly picky about the element sets
themselves. It checks most of the numbers for plausibility. In
NASA format files, it checks the checksum digit at the end of
each line. In AMSAT format files, if there is a checksum at the
end of the element set, InstantTrack checks that (unless this has
been disabled in the IT.INI configuration file). If anything
doesn't seem right, InstantTrack skips over that element set.
There is a parameter in the IT.INI configuration file that
controls how InstantTrack interprets the checksum in a NASA
format file. See ITINIDOC.TXT for details.

InstantTrack reads the elements file very quickly, almost
instantly on modern computers. It tells you what it found in the
file, element set by element set, coded by color. If the screen
fills up, InstantTrack waits for you to type any key to continue.
You can also type Esc at this prompt, which causes InstantTrack
to continue through the file without waiting again. After
updating satellite elements, the database file (stored in a file
named IT.ORB) is automatically updated.


6.1.2. Manual Satellite Element Entry

To examine orbital elements of satellites in the InstantTrack
database, or manually enter or edit them, specify option 8
(View / Edit satellite elements by hand) on the Update Satellite
Elements screen.

InstantTrack will then present you with a satellite selection
menu, so that you can specify which satellite elements you want
to view or edit. Enter the number or the name of the satellite
you want.

After you pick a satellite, the "Manual Edit Satellite Elements"
screen will appear, showing the present elements for the
satellite you picked. For example:

   Satellite:  ao-13
Object Number: 19216
NASA Designation:   1988-51b
Element Set #: 123
Epoch Time, T0:     88 361.0000000
                    12/26/1988  00:00:0.00
Epoch Rev, K0: 377
Mean Anomaly, M0:   126.35640
Mean Motion, N0:    2.096985043
Inclination, I0:    57.40580
Eccentricity, E0:   0.66206910
Arg Perigee, W0:    195.23090
R.A.A.N., O0:  228.38820
Beacon Frq, F1:     145.8120
   Decay, N1:  7.00000e-008
    Attitude:  2,212
    Diameter:  3.0
      Groups:  a
    Schedule:  003B100J150B240


The meaning of each of these values is explained in the following
section labeled "Understanding Satellite Elements".

At this point the following commands can be used...

    up arrow   move cursor to previous element
  down arrow   move cursor to next element
  left arrow   move to previous satellite in database
 right arrow   move to next satellite in database
         =     edit this element
         D     view/hide derived values
         Q     quit editing. go back to main menu


To change the value of an element, move the cursor to the
appropriate line, type the "=" key, then type a new value for the
element, followed by the Enter key. The program will not allow
inappropriate values to be entered, but you still need to be
careful to enter the value correctly.

Note that Epoch Time is displayed on two lines. The first line
displays epoch as a year and day number. The second line displays
the same epoch in common units. Epoch may manually entered on
either of these two lines. Enter on the first line if you are
typing a time in the year and day number format (don't forget to
put a space between them), and on the second line if you are
using the more familiar m/d/y h:m:s form.

As you make changes to the elements, these changes are recorded
in the copy of the satellite elements database that InstantTrack
is holding in memory. If you have changed any elements,
InstantTrack will ask you whether the changes should be written
to the satellite elements file on disk (when you exit the Manual
Edit Satellite Elements screen). If you answer no, the changes
you have made will be temporary, and will be lost when you exit
InstantTrack. You might want to do that in order to experiment
with various element values.

The D command causes derived values to appear on the right hand
side of the screen. These values are explained below, in the
section labeled "Understanding Derived Values". They will
disappear temporarily (to make room for parameter entry) if you
type the "=" key to enter a parameter.


6.1.3. Satellite Elements Maintenance Functions

The Update Satellite Elements Menu allows you to do some
additional things besides the basic functions described above.
Specifically:

        4. OLD:    Delete satellites with old orbital elements.
        5. CRASH:  Delete satellites that have crashed.
        6. DELETE: Delete a satellite manually.
        7. SQUISH: Compact the satellite elements database.

Because InstantTrack can handle such a large number of
satellites, you may never need to delete anything from the
database. My philosophy is that if you don't need to delete
objects, then you should probably leave them in the database,
and I urge you to adopt this philosophy.

However, if you often load elements for short-lived objects or
missions (discarded boosters, shuttle missions, etc.) the
database may become cluttered with entries which are no longer
valid, or the database may simply fill up. Selections 4, 5, 6
allow you to get rid of unwanted objects.

Option 4 "OLD" deletes all satellites with an epoch older than
some number of days. You can specify the age cutoff. It defaults
to 100 days. (Elements older than 100 days can still be useful,
especially for high-orbiting satellites. This threshold assumes
that a satellite that hasn't been updated in 100 days is no
longer of interest.)

Option 5 "CRASH" deletes all satellites where InstantTrack
computes a perigee which is below the surface of the Earth. The
object may have actually crashed, or the element set you have may
no longer be valid. The files of NASA elements distributed by
T.S.Kelso often contain some very short-lived objects. It is not
uncommon to find a couple of objects that crash within days after
you get a new file of elements. It is not necessary to delete
these objects, but InstantTrack will find them and delete them
for you if you wish.

Option 6 "DELETE" lets you delete a specific satellite.

Option 7 "SQUISH" As you delete satellites from the database, you
leave holes. In other words, if you delete satellite number 33,
then number 33 will show as blank on the satellite menu. Option 7
slides all the satellites up in the database to fill in the
holes. This is also entirely optional.


6.1.4. ITSORT Satellite Database Maintenance Utility

In addition to the built-in features of InstantTrack, you may use
the included program ITSORT to manage your satellite database.
See the file ITSORT.TXT for details.


6.1.5. Automating Satellite Element Updates

InstantTrack has two ways to further automate the updating of
Keplerian elements. One method or the other should be easy enough
to integrate into any automation scheme you may want to use.

In the first method, you specify "/F FILENAME" on the command
line when you run InstantTrack, like this:

     C:\> it /f c:\download\nasa.all

The "/F" part tells InstantTrack to look for a filename, and the
next part is the filename itself. When you invoke InstantTrack
this way, it doesn't display the menu or do any of the normal
functions. Instead, it just reads the file you specified, in
Update mode, and then exits. This method is ideal for situations
where you can easily run a program as part of the download
process. For example, if your email program has "filters", you
can program a filter to detect a message containing Keplerian
elements, and let the filter automatically run InstantTrack with
the "/F" switch to instantly load the new elements into the
database.

In the second method, you specify the filename using the
auto_read_kepsfile parameter in the IT.INI configuration file
(see ITINIDOC.TXT for details). In this case, InstantTrack reads
the file on startup, but it then proceeds to display the main
menu and run normally. With this method, you don't need to run a
program as part of your automation. Just arrange for the elements
file to be in a predictable place, and InstantTrack will find it
there next time it is run.

With either method, InstantTrack doesn't stop for anything during
the Keplerian file update. Even if there are errors, InstantTrack
rushes along at full speed. The idea is that you don't want to be
bothered with any interaction during the fully automated update.
You might not even be at the computer! However, it does mean that
if something goes wrong, you might not notice. Check your
automation setup carefully, and occasionally inspect the elements
database manually to be sure the elements are up to date.

Since it's now possible for a second InstantTrack to come along
and change the satellite database while a first InstantTrack is
still running, InstantTrack will warn you on the Update Satellite
Elements screen if the database file (IT.ORB) has been modified
since the last time it was read or written. When you see this
warning, be careful. If you make changes to the database while
the warning is displayed, you will overwrite any changes that
were made by the automated update. To avoid this problem, exit
InstantTrack and restart it.

There are some third-party programs out there that update the
InstantTrack database directly. Since the database format has
changed since version 1.00, these programs probably won't work
anymore. Instead of updating those programs, you are strongly
encouraged to use the features of InstantTrack described in this
section to update the database.


6.2. Understanding Satellite Elements

Seven numbers are required to define a satellite orbit. This set
of seven numbers is called the satellite orbital elements, or
sometimes "Keplerian" elements (after Johannes Kepler [1571-
1630]), or just elements. These numbers define an ellipse, orient
it about the Earth, and place the satellite on the ellipse at a
particular time. In the Keplerian model, satellites orbit in an
ellipse of constant shape and orientation.

The real world is slightly more complex than the Keplerian model,
and InstantTrack compensates for this by introducing minor
corrections to the Keplerian model. These corrections are known
as perturbations. The perturbations that InstantTrack knows about
are due to the lumpiness of the Earth's gravitational field
(which luckily you don't have to specify), and the "drag" on the
satellite due to atmosphere. Drag becomes an optional eighth
orbital element.

Orbital elements remain a mystery to most people. This is due I
think first to the aversion many people (including me) have to
thinking in three dimensions, and second to the horrible names
the ancient astronomers gave these seven simple numbers and a few
related concepts. To make matters worse, sometimes several
different names are used to specify the same number. Vocabulary
is the hardest part of celestial mechanics!

The basic orbital elements are...

               1. Epoch
               2. Orbital Inclination
               3. Right Ascension of Ascending Node
               4. Argument of Perigee
               5. Eccentricity
               6. Mean Motion
               7. Mean Anomaly
And the optional...
               8. Drag

The following definitions are intended to be easy to understand.
More rigorous definitions can be found in almost any book on the
subject. I've used aka as an abbreviation for "also known as" in
the following text.


Epoch
[aka "Epoch Time" or "T0"]

A set of orbital elements is a snapshot, at a particular time, of
the orbit of a satellite. Epoch is simply a number which
specifies the time at which the snapshot was taken.


Orbital Inclination
[aka "Inclination" or "I0"]

The orbit ellipse lies in a plane known as the orbital plane. The
orbital plane always goes through the center of the Earth, but
may be tilted any angle relative to the equator. Inclination is
the angle between the orbital plane and the equatorial plane. By
convention, inclination is a number between 0 and 180 degrees.

Some vocabulary: Orbits with inclination near 0 degrees are
called equatorial orbits (because the satellite stays nearly over
the equator). Orbits with inclination near 90 degrees are called
polar (because the satellite crosses over the north and south
poles). The intersection of the equatorial plane and the orbital
plane is a line which is called the line of nodes. More about
that later.


Right Ascension of Ascending Node
[aka "RAAN" or "RA of Node" or "O0", and occasionally called
"Longitude of Ascending Node"]

RAAN wins the prize for most horribly named orbital element. Two
numbers orient the orbital plane in space. The first number was
Inclination. This is the second. After we've specified
inclination, there are still an infinite number of orbital planes
possible. The line of nodes can poke out the anywhere along the
equator. If we specify where along the equator the line of nodes
pokes out, we will have the orbital plane fully specified. The
line of nodes pokes out two places, of course. We only need to
specify one of them. One is called the ascending node (where the
satellite crosses the equator going from south to north). The
other is called the descending node (where the satellite crosses
the equator going from north to south). By convention, we specify
the location of the ascending node.

Now, the Earth is spinning. This means that we can't use the
common latitude/longitude coordinate system to specify where the
line of nodes points. Instead, we use an astronomical coordinate
system, known as the right ascension / declination coordinate
system, which does not spin with the Earth. Right ascension is
another fancy word for an angle, in this case, an angle measured
in the equatorial plane from a reference point in the sky where
right ascension is defined to be zero. Astronomers call this
point the vernal equinox.

Finally, "right ascension of ascending node" is an angle,
measured at the center of the Earth, from the vernal equinox to
the ascending node.

I know this is getting complicated. Here's an example. Draw a
line from the center of the Earth to the point where our
satellite crosses the equator (going from south to north). If
this line points directly at the vernal equinox, then RAAN = 0
degrees.

By convention, RAAN is a number in the range 0 to 360 degrees.

I used the term "vernal equinox" above without really defining
it. If you can tolerate a minor digression, I'll do that now.
Teachers have told children for years that the vernal equinox is
"the place in the sky where the sun rises on the first day of
Spring". This is a horrible definition. Most teachers, and
students, have no idea what the first day of spring is (except a
date on a calendar), and no idea why the sun should be in the
same place in the sky on that date every year.

You now have enough astronomy vocabulary to get a better
definition. Consider the orbit of the sun around the Earth. I
know in school they told you the Earth orbits around the sun, but
the math is equally valid either way, and it suits our needs at
this instant to think of the sun orbiting the Earth. The orbit of
the sun has an inclination of about 23.5 degrees. (Astronomers
don't usually call this 23.5 degree angle an `inclination', by
the way. They use an infinitely more obscure name: The Obliquity
of The Ecliptic.) The orbit of the sun is divided (by humans)
into four equally sized portions called seasons. The one called
Spring begins when the sun pops up past the equator. In other
words, the first day of Spring is the day that the sun crosses
through the equatorial plane going from South to North. We have a
name for that! It's the ascending node of the Sun's orbit. So
finally, the vernal equinox is nothing more than the ascending
node of the Sun's orbit. The Sun's orbit has RAAN = 0 simply
because we've defined the Sun's ascending node as the place from
which all ascending nodes are measured. The RAAN of your
satellite's orbit is just the angle (measured at the center of
the Earth) between the place the Sun's orbit pops up past the
equator, and the place your satellite's orbit pops up past the
equator.


Argument of Perigee
[aka "ARGP" or "W0"]

Argument is yet another fancy word for angle. Now that we've
oriented the orbital plane in space, we need to orient the orbit
ellipse in the orbital plane. We do this by specifying a single
angle known as argument of perigee.

A few words about elliptical orbits... The point where the
satellite is closest to the Earth is called perigee, although
it's sometimes called periapsis or perifocus. We'll call it
perigee. The point where the satellite is farthest from Earth is
called apogee (aka apoapsis, or apifocus). If we draw a line from
perigee to apogee, this line is called the line-of-apsides.
(Apsides is, of course, the plural of apsis.) I know, this is
getting complicated again. Sometimes the line-of-apsides is
called the major axis of the ellipse. It's just a line drawn
through the ellipse the "long way".

The line-of-apsides passes through the center of the Earth. We've
already identified another line passing through the center of the
Earth: the line of nodes. The angle between these two lines is
called the argument of perigee. Where any two lines intersect,
they form two complementary angles, so to be specific, we say
that argument of perigee is the angle (measured at the center of
the Earth) from the ascending node to perigee.

Example: When ARGP = 0, the perigee occurs at the same place as
the ascending node. That means that the satellite would be
closest to Earth just as it rises up over the equator. When ARGP
= 180 degrees, apogee would occur at the same place as the
ascending node. That means that the satellite would be farthest
from Earth just as it rises up over the equator.

By convention, ARGP is an angle between 0 and 360 degrees.


Eccentricity
[aka "ecce" or "E0" or "e"]

This one is simple. In the Keplerian orbit model, the satellite
orbit is an ellipse. Eccentricity tells us the "shape" of the
ellipse. When e=0, the ellipse is a circle. When e is very near
1, the ellipse is very long and skinny.

(To be precise, the Keplerian orbit is a conic section, which can
be either an ellipse, which includes circles, a parabola, a
hyperbola, or a straight line! But here, we are only interested
in elliptical orbits. The other kinds of orbits are not used for
satellites, at least not on purpose, and InstantTrack isn't pro
grammed to handle them.) For our purposes, eccentricity must be
in the range 0 <= e < 1.


Mean Motion
[aka "N0"] (related to "orbit period" and "semimajor axis")

So far we've nailed down the orientation of the orbital plane,
the orientation of the orbit ellipse in the orbital plane, and
the shape of the orbit ellipse. Now we need to know the "size" of
the orbit ellipse. In other words, how far away is the satellite?

Kepler's third law of orbital motion gives us a precise
relationship between the speed of the satellite and its distance
from the Earth. Satellites that are close to the Earth orbit very
quickly. Satellites far away orbit slowly. This means that we
could accomplish the same thing by specifying either the speed at
which the satellite is moving, or its distance from the Earth!

Satellites in circular orbits travel at a constant speed. Simple.
We just specify that speed, and we're done. Satellites in non-
circular (i.e., eccentricity > 0) orbits move faster when they
are closer to the Earth, and slower when they are farther away.
The common practice is to average the speed. You could call this
number "average speed", but astronomers call it the "Mean
Motion". Mean Motion is usually given in units of revolutions per
day.

In this context, a revolution or period is defined as the time
from one perigee to the next.

Sometimes "orbit period" is specified as an orbital element
instead of Mean Motion. Period is simply the reciprocal of Mean
Motion. A satellite with a Mean Motion of 2 revs per day, for
example, has a period of 12 hours.

Sometimes semi-major axis (SMA) is specified instead of Mean
Motion. SMA is one-half the length (measured the long way) of the
orbit ellipse, and is directly related to mean motion by a simple
equation.

Typically, satellites have Mean Motions in the range of 1 rev/day
to about 16 rev/day.


Mean Anomaly
[aka "M0" or "MA" or "Phase"]

Now that we have the size, shape, and orientation of the orbit
firmly established, the only thing left to do is specify where
exactly the satellite is on this orbit ellipse at some particular
time. Our very first orbital element (Epoch) specified a
particular time, so all we need to do now is specify where, on
the ellipse, our satellite was exactly at the Epoch time.

Anomaly is yet another astronomer-word for angle. Mean anomaly is
simply an angle that marches uniformly in time from 0 to 360
degrees during one revolution. It is defined to be 0 degrees at
perigee, and therefore is 180 degrees at apogee.

If you had a satellite in a circular orbit (therefore moving at
constant speed) and you stood in the center of the Earth and
measured this angle from perigee, you would point directly at the
satellite. Satellites in non-circular orbits move at a non-
constant speed, so this simple relation doesn't hold. This
relation does hold for two important points on the orbit,
however, no matter what the eccentricity. Perigee always occurs
at MA = 0, and apogee always occurs at MA = 180 degrees.

It has become common practice with radio amateur satellites to
use Mean Anomaly to schedule satellite operations. Satellites
commonly change modes or turn on or off at specific places in
their orbits, specified by Mean Anomaly. Unfortunately, when used
this way, it is common to specify MA in units of 256ths of a
circle instead of degrees! To minimize confusion, when
InstantTrack displays MA in units of 256ths of a circle, it's
called phase instead of Mean Anomaly. When entering Mean Anomaly
as an orbital element, it must, however, be specified in degrees,
between 0 and 360.

Example: Suppose OSCAR-99 has a period of 12 hours, and is turned
off from Phase 240 to 16. That means it's off for 32 ticks of
phase. There are 256 of these ticks in the entire 12 hour orbit,
so it's off for (32/256)x12hrs = 1.5 hours. Note that the off
time is centered on perigee. Satellites in highly eccentric
orbits are often turned off near perigee when they're moving the
fastest, and therefore difficult to use.


Drag
[aka "N1"]

Drag caused by the Earth's atmosphere causes satellites to spiral
downward. As they spiral downward, they speed up. The Drag
orbital element simply tells us the rate at which Mean Motion is
changing due to drag or other related effects. Precisely, Drag is
one half the first time derivative of Mean Motion.

Its units are revolutions per day per day. It is typically a very
small number. Common values for low-Earth-orbiting satellites are
on the order of 10**-4. Common values for high-orbiting satellites
are on the order of 10**-7 or smaller.

Occasionally, published orbital elements for a high-orbiting
satellite will show a negative Drag! At first, this may seem
absurd. Drag due to friction with the Earth's atmosphere can only
make a satellite spiral downward, never upward.

There are several potential reasons for negative drag. First, the
measurement which produced the orbital elements may have been in
error. It is common to estimate orbital elements from a small
number of observations made over a short period of time. With
such measurements, it is extremely difficult to estimate Drag.
Very ordinary small errors in measurement can produce a small
negative drag.

The second potential cause for a negative drag in published
elements is a little more complex. A satellite is subject to many
forces besides the two we have discussed so far (Earth's gravity,
and atmospheric drag). Some of these forces (for example gravity
of the sun and moon) may act together to cause a satellite to be
pulled upward by a very slight amount. This can happen if the Sun
and Moon are aligned with the satellite's orbit in a particular
way. If the orbit is measured when this is happening, a small
negative Drag term may actually provide the best possible `fit'
to the actual satellite motion over a *short* period of time.

You typically want a set of orbital elements to estimate the
position of a satellite reasonably well for as long as possible,
often several months. Negative Drag never accurately reflects
what's happening over a long period of time. This program will
accept negative values for Drag, but I don't approve of them.
Feel free to substitute zero in place of any published negative
Drag value.


6.3. Understanding Satellite Parameters

All the satellite parameters described below are optional. They
allow InstantTrack to perform some of its more sophisticated (and
fun) calculations, so you are urged to read this section, even
though you are not required to enter these parameters.

NASA Designation

This item consists of the year of launch, a serial number within
the year, and a letter designating this object among the several
objects placed into orbit by that launch. As the name suggests,
it is assigned by NASA for reference.

Element Set Number

This number labels a particular element set from a given source.
It is just copied from the element set file and displayed here
for your reference.

Epoch Rev
[aka "Revolution Number at Epoch"]

This tells InstantTrack how many times the satellite has orbited
from the time it was launched until the time specified by
"Epoch". Epoch Rev is used by InstantTrack to calculate the revo
lution number shown on the realtime screens, and to calculate
satellite age on the Satellite Elements Edit screen. Don't be
surprised if you find that orbital element sets which come from
NASA have incorrect values for Epoch Rev. The folks who compute
satellite orbits don't tend to pay a great deal of attention to
this number! At the time of this writing, elements from NASA had
an incorrect Epoch Rev for OSCAR-10 and OSCAR-13. Unless you use
the revolution number for your own bookkeeping purposes, you
needn't worry about the accuracy of Epoch Rev.

Beacon Frequency

You can specify a frequency of interest for each satellite. This
is typically the frequency of a beacon transmitter on the
satellite. This number is used in the calculation of Doppler,
path loss and Tsky. (Doppler, path loss, and Tsky are described
in the section on realtime tracking.)  You can edit this item
even on the Sun and Moon, in order to enable the Tsky calculation
to work (for EME).

Schedule

Many satellites have several operating modes, and switch from one
mode to another at predefined places in their orbits.
InstantTrack understands satellite schedules which are based on
"phase" (mean anomaly expressed in units of 256ths of a circle).
This is one common scheduling technique for amateur radio
satellites.

If given a schedule, InstantTrack will calculate and display the
satellite mode. The schedule is a string of numbers and letters.
A three digit number specifies the phase at which a mode begins,
then a single letter specifies the mode. This is repeated up to
12 times. (In other words, a schedule may contain up to twelve
mode changes, but no more.) The numbers in the string must be in
an ascending sequence. No spaces are allowed.

For example, at one time OSCAR-13's schedule read...

                  Phase  Mode
                  000-002     Off
                  003-099     mode-B
                  100-149     mode-JL
                  150-239     mode-B
                  240-255     Off

The schedule string you would enter into InstantTrack in this
case is "003B100J150B240O". Read this as, "At phase 003 change to
mode B. At phase 100 change to mode J.", etc. You are free to use
whichever letter you find easy to remember for each mode.

Actually, you can use most any character. I recommend you use a
hyphen ("-") for the Off mode, to improve readability of
schedules. In that case, you might use "003B100J150B240-" for the
schedule above. Another trick is to use both upper and lower
case. For example, Mode B may be represented by "B" when the gain
antennas are in use, and by "b" when the omnidirectional antennas
are in use.

Attitude
[aka "Bahn Coordinates" or "BLAT" and "BLON" or "ALAT" and
"ALON"]

The spacecraft attitude is a measure of how the satellite is
oriented in space. Hopefully, it is oriented so that its antennas
point toward you! There are several orientation schemes used in
satellites. This program assumes that the satellite is either
spin-stabilized, or local-vertical. A spin-stabilized satellite
maintains a constant inertial orientation, i.e., its antennas
point a fixed direction in space (examples: OSCAR-10, OSCAR-13).
Local-Vertical satellites, as you might expect, always point
toward Earth (examples: OSCAR-14, and most geostationary
satellites).

If spacecraft attitude has not been set, then it will display as
"None Set" in the satellite element editor. In this case,
InstantTrack will not know the spacecraft attitude, and therefore
will not calculate offpointing (squint) angles, or the good
squint angle regions on the map. This will not affect operation
of the more basic calculations (Azimuth, Elevation, Doppler,
etc.). Attitude is optional. You may also enter the value "None
Set" (or just "N"), to indicate that you don't know the
spacecraft attitude.

You enter the value "Local Vertical" (or just "L") to indicate
that a spacecraft is designed to point toward the center of the
Earth. Note that local-vertical satellites typically have
antennas that are not designed to have the most gain aiming
straight down. Instead, they are designed to have gain at some
angle to the vertical, in order to compensate for the greater
distance to ground stations not directly below the satellite.
This means you'll need to learn by experience how what
offpointing angles are the best for each satellite.

For spin-stabilized satellites, attitude is described by two
angles, often called Bahn Latitude, and Bahn Longitude or ALAT
and ALON. These are published from time to time for the
elliptical-orbit amateur radio satellites in various amateur
satellite publications. When the satellite is under active
attitude control, the attitude may change only a few times per
year. When the satellite's attitude is uncontrolled (as in OSCAR-
10 since its on-board computer failed), the attitude drifts
slowly over months of time in orbit. For these satellites, all
you have to do is enter these two numbers, latitude first, then a
comma, then longitude. For highly elliptical orbits (OSCAR-10,
OSCAR-13, etc.) these numbers are usually in the vicinity of:
0,180. This means that the antennas point directly toward Earth
when the satellite is at apogee. (Note that some sources list the
coordinates in the opposite order, usually with a slash between
them. Example: 180/0.)

These two numbers describe a direction in a spherical coordinate
system, just as geographic latitude and longitude describe a
direction from the center of the Earth. In this case, however,
the primary axis is along the vector from the satellite to the
center of the Earth when the satellite is at perigee.

An excellent description of Bahn coordinates can be found in Phil
Karn's "Bahn Coordinates Guide". See the bibliography.

Other spacecraft use attitude control mechanisms that
InstantTrack can't handle. These include magnetic stabilization
(AO-16 and similar microsats) and 3-axis stabilization (Phase 3D
after its successful commissioning). For these satellites, enter
"None" for the attitude.

Diameter

This parameter gives InstantTrack a rough idea of the size of the
satellite. Diameter is specified in units of meters. Diameter is
used to estimate the brightness (which stargazers call magnitude)
of a satellite for visual observation. InstantTrack is only inter
ested in knowing the rough amount of area which will reflect
light. If the satellite is shaped like a sphere, or cube, or
other symmetrical shape, then diameter means exactly what you
think. If, on the other hand, the satellite is long and skinny,
you have to come up with a number which you hope will be
representative. I've used 10 meters for Mir, 1 meter for OSCAR-
10, OSCAR-13, 0.25 meters for the AMSAT microsats, etc.

Groups

Because InstantTrack contains such a large database of
satellites, it is convenient to categorize satellites in the
database, so that some functions can operate on a subset of the
database. There are 27 "groups" of satellites that you are
allowed to define. They are named A through Z, and "!". There are
also two predefined groups named * and %. Each satellite, and the
Sun and Moon, may be a member of up to eight user-defined groups.

The following groupnames have special meaning...

     *    This group contains all satellites.
     
     !    Your "favorite satellites" group. Displayed on the
          bottom row.
          
     %    All satellites that do not belong to any A-Z group.

Here are some groups that I have defined. You may use these same
meanings for these letters, or any other meanings you choose.

     A = Amateur Radio Satellites (OSCARs)
     G = GPS (Navstar) Navigation Satellites
     L = Low Earth Orbiting Satellites
     P = Pacsats (Amateur Packet-Radio Satellites)
     R = Russian Satellites
     W = Weather Satellites

You specify which groups a satellite is in by entering a "groups"
string in the satellite element editor. A groups string is just
all of the group names that apply to the satellite, with no
intervening spaces.

Example: The satellite RS10 shows Groups: rla

In my convention, this means it is Russian and Low-Earth-Orbiting
and an Amateur Radio Satellite.


6.4.Understanding Derived Values

The D command causes several "derived values" to be displayed on
the right hand side of the satellite elements edit screen. These
numbers are derived from the orbital elements of each satellite
(but are not easily computed in your head). They are intended to
provide a more convenient description of the orbit than the
original elements.

Epoch Age

This is simply the time since the "epoch". This tells you how old
the orbital element set has become.

Satellite Age

This is a quick and dirty estimate of how long ago the satellite
was launched. It is computed from Epoch Rev and Mean Motion. Of
course, mean motion changes during a satellite's life, and the
elements don't give us any historical information, so we just
assume for this calculation that mean motion has been constant.
For most satellites, the error in the computed age seems to be
less than 1%. For low-Earth-orbiting satellites near end-of-life,
the error will be larger, because mean-motion has been changing.
For OSCAR-10, the computed age may be completely wrong, depending
on the source of your elements, because NASA publishes an
incorrect epoch rev!

Orbital Period

This is the duration of one orbit, measured from perigee to
perigee. Computed from mean-motion and decay.

Perigee Height
Apogee Height

These are the distance from the Earth's surface to the satellite
(i.e., height) when the satellite is closest (i.e., at perigee),
and farthest (i.e., at apogee).

Latitude of Apogee

Satellites in highly elliptical orbits are usually used when they
are near apogee. It is therefore useful to picture what part of
the Earth will be below the satellite at apogee. Latitude of
apogee is computed from argument of perigee and R.A.A.N. Because
both of these quantities change with time, latitude of apogee
also changes with time. Both the present value and rate of change
are shown.

Argument of Perigee
R.A.A.N.

These values change with time. (The values contained in the
orbital elements are the values as they were at Epoch.) Both the
present value and rate of change are shown on the right hand side
of the screen.

Longitude Increment

It is sometimes useful to think about just how much a satellite's
footprint moves (in the longitude direction) from one orbit to
the next. Especially for high-inclination satellites, each orbit
of a satellite provides coverage of a different portion of the
Earth. Mostly this happens because the Earth rotates a certain
amount during each orbit of the satellite, but the satellite's
orbit is also slowly changing with time, and this too provides a
small contribution.

For low-Earth-orbit satellites, increment is often in the range
of 20 to 30 degrees West per orbit.

For OSCAR-13, the increment was about 172 degrees per orbit --
almost half way around the Earth. So after two orbits, OSCAR-13
would move West by twice this amount, 344 degrees, which is just
16 degrees shy of 360. This means that every other apogee of
OSCAR-13 occurred in almost the same place over the Earth, moving
by just 16 degrees East each time.

Sun to Spinplane Angle

This angle is meaningful for spin-stabilized satellites only. If
you have entered attitude coordinates, InstantTrack assumes that
the antenna axis and spin axis are the same, then computes the
angle between the sun and the plane in which the satellite is
spinning. This may help you visualize how the sun illuminates
solar panels on the spacecraft. For example, for OSCAR-10 and
OSCAR-13, the power generated by the panels was roughly pro
portional to the cosine of this angle. The sun to spinplane angle
only appears if you have entered attitude coordinates for the
current satellite.

Sun to Orbitplane Angle

This is another angle which may help you visualize properties of
an orbit. There are many low-orbiting satellites designed to take
pictures of Earth. (Satellites designed for: Weather, Earth
Resources, Spying, etc.) Of course, the position of the sun
matters to anyone taking pictures! For a satellite aiming its cam
era "straight down" toward Earth, this angle tells us the angle
of the shadows that will be formed by mountains, buildings, etc.
in the pictures. Many satellites that take pictures are in "sun
synchronous" orbits, i.e., orbits for which this angle has a
constant value, and in many cases, this value is chosen to be
around 20 degrees.



7. Tracking a Satellite in Real Time


When you choose either of the "Realtime Track 1 Satellite" items
on the main menu, you are immediately presented with a satellite
selection menu. After you choose a satellite, all the information
about that satellite appears.


7.1. Choosing a Satellite

The satellite selection menu appears whenever you enter any mode
which will display information about one particular satellite.
Initially, you see the first page of the menu, which contains the
first 50 satellites. You can use the PgUp and PgDn keys to move
between pages of the menu.

The satellite names are displayed in one of three colors: white,
green, or yellow, with the following meanings..

     White     InstantTrack has not recently calculated this
               satellite's position.
               
     Green     This satellite is below the horizon right now.
     
     Yellow    This satellite is above the horizon right now.

All are initially white, of course. While waiting for you to make
your choice, InstantTrack whips through all the satellites in the
database, calculating their position, turning each name green or
yellow. This lets you know, even before selecting a satellite,
whether or not it is above the horizon! On modern computers, this
happens so fast you may never see a white satellite.

Initially, the selection menu displays all satellites in the
database. There is also a "group" command which restricts the
selection menu to display only a certain group of satellites The
group concept is explained in the section on satellite
parameters.. The group command is the character "G" followed by a
one-letter group name. You can type "G" with no following letter
or "G*" to go back to the full list.

Select your satellite by typing its number on the menu, or its
exact name as it appears on the menu (unless it starts with a G,
sigh). After you type Enter, the realtime tracking screen
appears. You do not need to wait for the names to change color
before typing your choice.


7.2. Understanding The Realtime (Text) Display

This screen contains almost everything you would ever want to
know about the present location of one satellite, and the view of
that satellite from one or several observers on Earth. The
display normally operates in real time, which means that it
displays information about the satellite which is valid right
now. It is also possible to enter a specific time, other than
"right now" using the T command, or run the display in "fast
forward" mode using the F command.

The numbers on the screen are displayed to lots of decimal
places. This doesn't mean that the numbers are really accurate to
that many places, though some of them are. Rather, the extra
digits are shown so you can visually estimate how fast the value
is changing.

Included on this screen are:

Azimuth and Elevation.

These are the angles you use to point an antenna at your station
toward the satellite. When Elevation is negative, the satellite
is below the horizon, and is not visible from your station.

These figures, along with the other figures on this line, are
colored green when the satellite is below your horizon, and
yellow when it is above your horizon.

Range, dR/dt, and Doppler

Range is the distance (in km) from your station to the satellite.
dR/dt is the rate at which Range is changing, in (km/second).
dR/dt determines Doppler. If you have entered a beacon frequency
for the satellite, the current Doppler shift for that frequency
is shown, in units of Hz.

Offpointing Angle (Offp)

Many satellites use directional antennas. Unfortunately, the
satellite antenna is seldom pointed directly at you! This angle
is a measure of how far away from you the satellite antenna is
pointed. It is 0 degrees when the satellite antenna is pointed
directly at you. If you know the beamwidth of the satellite an
tenna you can estimate how much degradation the link will suffer
due to the offpointing. For example, if the satellite has an
antenna with a 3dB beamwidth of 24 degrees, (i.e., 12 degree half-
beamwidth) then you will suffer 3dB of loss when the offpointing
angle is 12 degrees. When the offpointing is more than twice the
half-beamwidth, it becomes difficult to predict the satellite
antenna's performance, because you're in the region where antenna
sidelobes begin to appear.

OSCAR-10 and OSCAR-13 both had considerable asymmetries in some
of their directional antennas. Because the satellites were
spinning, these antenna asymmetries cause the signal to vary in
amplitude. This is often called spin modulation. The spin
modulation should be least when the offpointing angle is small.

Some satellites have antennas purposefully designed to radiate in
directions other than their axis of symmetry. For example, OSCAR-
10 and OSCAR-13 were equipped with high-gain antennas that
behaved as described above, and an alternate set of low-gain
antennas which performed best when the offpointing angle is near
90 degrees. These satellites were normally commanded to switch
between the two types of antennas at appropriate points in their
orbits.

The offpointing angle is only calculated when you have entered
attitude coordinates (or Local Vertical) for the current
satellite.

This angle is sometimes called squint.

Path Loss

Path Loss is the amount by which a signal is attenuated as it
travels from your station to the satellite, or vice versa. This
is a function of frequency (as set in the satellite element
database), and range from your station to the satellite. Path
loss is only displayed if the current satellite is above the
horizon, and a frequency has been entered for this satellite in
the database.

Satellites commonly operate on two or more frequencies
simultaneously. InstantTrack only displays the path loss at one
frequency. You can scale this number to produce path loss at a
different frequency if you wish. Path loss increases 1dB for
every 12.2% increase in frequency. For example, amateur radio
satellites often use uplink/downlink bands separated in frequency
by a factor of 3. (e.g. 145MHz / 435MHz) A factor of 3 in
frequency corresponds to approximately 9.5dB change in path loss.

I suggest you use path loss as a relative indication (for a given
frequency, mode, Earth station configuration, etc.) of expected
link quality. Satellite communications links are almost always
downlink limited. The downlink signal power available at your
receiver is (all numbers in dB)...

               Transmitter power
               + Transmit antenna gain
               + Path Loss
               + Receive antenna gain

If all other things were constant, receive signal power would
vary directly with path loss.

Subsatellite Point

If you draw a line from the satellite to the center of the Earth,
the point where this line intersects the Earth's surface is
called the subsatellite point. The coordinates of the subsatel
lite point are displayed three different ways:

Latitude/Longitude

This is the coordinate system in which the subsatellite point is
traditionally displayed. It is useful when comparing results
against other programs. Unfortunately, most humans don't think in
terms of latitude and longitude. These are not user-friendly
coordinates.

Nearest City

This is the user-friendly way to describe a location on the
Earth. It displays the distance and direction to the nearest
city. The nearest city is chosen from InstantTrack's database of
1794 cities worldwide. For example, the subsatellite point:
40.0N, 110.0W would be displayed as "142.7 km East of Provo, UT".
If this display bothers you, you can turn it off by typing C (for
City).

Gridsquare

Radio Amateur operators sometimes use a gridsquare coordinate
system to identify places on the Earth. InstantTrack also
displays the subsatellite point as a gridsquare. Our example
[40.0N, 110.0W] is in gridsquare DM59ax. An article listed in the
bibliography describes the gridsquare system.

Altitude

This is the altitude of the satellite above the Earth's surface.

Rev

This is a number that indicates how many times the satellite has
orbited since launch. Rev increments each time the satellite
passes through perigee. This value depends on the accuracy of the
Epoch Rev from the satellite elements, which may or may not be
reliable.

Phase

This is a number that increments from 0 through 255 during each
orbit of the satellite. See the discussion of mean anomaly in the
"Understanding Satellite Elements" section.

Mode

This is the operating mode of the satellite, as determined by the
satellite schedule. See "Understanding Satellite Parameters" for
a discussion of schedules. Mode will only be displayed if a valid
schedule has been entered for this satellite.

XYZ-Coordinates

These are the coordinates of the satellite and the observer in
the cartesian geocentric inertial coordinate system. These are
called IJK coordinates in some books. The X axis points from the
center of the Earth toward the vernal equinox. The Y axis points
90 degrees to the east of the X axis. The Z axis points straight
up through the geographic North Pole. Units are kilometers. All
the other numbers on this screen are calculated from the
cartesian coordinates of the satellite and observer. If this
display bothers you, you can turn it off by typing I for IJK.

Next Rise/Set

This is the time at which the satellite is next expected to rise
or set over the horizon. This is only calculated if you have
enabled this feature, via the "W" (for When) command.

Skygazer's Information

The following three parameters are related to the sky and to
visual observation of the satellite. These displays may be turned
off by typing S for Sky.

R.A. / Decl

These are the Right Ascension and Declination of the satellite as
viewed from your location. Right Ascension and Declination are
coordinates used by astronomers to locate objects in the sky.
They are similar to longitude and latitude, except that they
represent locations on the celestial sphere instead of the Earth.
R.A. and Dec are the coordinates shown on star charts.

Tsky

This is the sky noise temperature in the direction of the
satellite (i.e., the direction in which your antennas are
pointed). The stars generate radio noise. (That's what Radio
Astronomy is about.) This noise is largest when your antennas are
pointed toward the plane of the galaxy (also known as the Milky
Way), and very large when pointed toward the center of the
galaxy. Tsky also depends on frequency. Tsky is larger at lower
frequencies. If you have entered a frequency in the satellite
database for a particular satellite then InstantTrack will
compute and display the expected sky temperature. Noise
temperatures can be added directly. You can therefore add Tsky to
the temperatures of other noise sources in your receiving system
(preamp, cable attenuation, sidelobes) when calculating receiving
system performance. See the ARRL Handbook.

Visibility (Magnitude)

InstantTrack attempts to provide you with an estimate of whether
a satellite might be visible to the eye. We estimate the
brightness of reflected sunlight from the satellite, and a one
letter code which indicates whether all the conditions for
visibility are met.

Here are the conditions normally required for satellite
visibility...

      1.    The satellite should be above the horizon.
      
      2.    The satellite should be in sunlight (i.e., not
            eclipsed).
            
      3.    The sun should be down, so the observer is in
            darkness. We use the rule that the sun should be at
            least 5 degrees below the horizon.
            
      4.    The satellite should be bright enough to see.
            The cutoff here depends heavily on your local
            situation (city light pollution, etc.).

The code letters are...
      H -- The satellite is below the Horizon
      E -- The satellite is in Eclipse
      S -- The Sun is up
      V -- The satellite is Visible

Brightness is presented in units of "magnitude", which is a scale
created by astronomers to categorize the brightness of stars. It
is a logarithmic scale (like decibels, or wire gauge). Every
increase of one magnitude means 2.5119 times less light. Bigger
magnitude numbers correspond to dimmer objects. The nice thing
about these magnitude units is that star charts usually show the
magnitude of each star, so you can usually find some nearby
reference points.

Here's a brief guide to interpretation of visual magnitudes:
             
     -4      Wow!
             
     0       As bright as the brightest star in the sky
             
     4       Barely visible to the naked eye on a clear
             night in the city
             
     6       Barely visible to the naked eye on a clear
             night in the country, where the sky is dark
             enough to see the Milky Way clearly
             
     9       Barely visible with good binoculars in dark
             sky

Because many factors affect the brightness of a satellite, you
should use the number IT calculates only as an estimate. IT takes
into consideration only the size, range, and sun angle of the
satellite.

Other considerations affecting brightness are shape and
reflectivity. If you were building a spy satellite, for example,
you might consider painting it black, so it would be difficult to
see. On the other hand, if you were building a satellite
specifically to be observed, you might cover it with mirrors.
(Ajisai, also called EGP, is a 2 meter diameter mirrorball built
by the Japanese for just this purpose). The difference in
brightness between these two cases could be substantial.

The model in IT has been calibrated against two experienced
observers, and their observations differ as much as + or - 1.5
magnitudes from IT's estimates for commonly observed objects such
as Mir and Salyut-7.

IT will not attempt to calculate brightness of an object unless
the Diameter parameter has been entered in the satellite
database.

Two items listed in the bibliography give more information on
observing satellites.


7.3. Commands

While in the realtime tracking (text) screen, the following one-
character commands apply:

           space  freeze/unfreeze the display.
               B  enable/disable the bottom-row display
               C  enable/disable nearest-city display
               E  look at orbital elements for this satellite
               F  enable/disable Fast-Forward
               I  enable/disable display of XYZ coordinates.
               O  add/delete a station (observer).
               R  enable/disable antenna rotor and radio control
               S  enable/disable RA/Dec/Tsky/Magn display
               T  set a specific time, or return to realtime.
               W  enable/disable display of next rise/set time.
               Q  quit tracking. go back to main menu.
               Z  toggle between local/UTC timezones.
     right arrow  advance to next satellite.
      left arrow  go back to previous satellite.
Ctrl+right arrow  advance to next satellite in this group
Ctrl+ left arrow  go back to previous satellite in this group

If you don't remember all these commands, remember that you can
type ? while the realtime text screen is running, and this menu
of possibilities will appear instantly on your screen. To exit
that help screen, as usual, type Q.

All these commands should operate in a fairly obvious fashion
except for the "O" and "T" commands, which are described in the
following sections.


7.4. Setting a Specific Time

InstantTrack normally displays satellite positions in realtime.
In other words, the calculations assume the position of the Earth
and satellite "right now". If you want to see the calculations
for some specific time, type T. You will then be prompted to
enter a specific time. Here, and all other places that
InstantTrack prompts for a time, any of several formats will be
accepted. See the section "How Time is Displayed and Entered" for
more detail. You can return to realtime calculations by typing T
followed by Enter.

You may also respond by typing the words rise or set, or aos or
los, which will cause time to be set to the next time the current
satellite rises above the horizon, or sets. Any of these keywords
can be followed by "@" and a location. Any of the observer
location formats described in the next section can be used here.
InstantTrack will jump to the next time the current satellites
rises above the horizon at that location, or sets at that
location.

Some examples may help:
     
     aos @ kb5mu
     rise @ san diego
     los @ DM12
     set @ 32N/117W
     aos @ s  [ then pick from the menu ]
     aos @ c  [ then pick from the menu ]

Or, you can enter the word "phase" or "phs" followed by a number
from 0 to 255, and the time will jump forward to the next point
in time when the current satellite's "phase" is equal to that
number.

Or, you can enter the word "mode" followed by a mode letter, and
the time will jump forward to the next point in time when the
satellite switches into that mode. If the satellite is already in
that mode, time will jump forward to the beginning of the next
session of that mode.


7.5. Controlling the Observer-List

The realtime text screen will display station-related parameters
(azimuth, elevation, squint, path-loss, etc.) for a list of up to
four stations. When you first fire up the screen, only one
station is shown. This is always the first station (station #1)
from the station database. This section describes how you can add
stations to or delete stations from the station list using the
"O" command.

After you type O, you will be prompted to specify the station you
want to add to the list:

     Observer name, city, gridsquare, lat/lon, s, c, or d# :

What this prompt tells you is that you can type almost anything
you know about the observer you'd like to add, and InstantTrack
will try to use that information.

Because there are several options here, the explanation begins to
sound complicated. Stay tuned. It's very simple! We'll take these
one at a time.

If you know the name (callsign) of the station you'd like to add,
and that station is in the station database, you can just type
the callsign. InstantTrack will search the database, and find the
station information. For example, if you've just started a
conversation with KB5MU via your favorite satellite, then you can
just type KB5MU.

If you know the station you want to add is in the database, but
you can't remember the callsign, then you can type "s", which
gets you to the station selection menu, which displays all the
stations which you have defined, and where you can pick the
station you want.

If the station you want to add is not in the station database,
and you don't want to take the time to edit the database, you can
describe a "visiting" station. This can be done several ways! By
city name, gridsquare, or latitude/longitude.

If you know the gridsquare of the station you want to add, you
can just type the gridsquare. For example, if you've started a
conversation with someone who says he's at grid "DM12", then you
can just type DM12 . Either the four character or six character
gridsquare will be accepted. Most Amateur Radio operators know
their gridsquare. Asking "What's your gridsquare?" then typing it
into InstantTrack is usually a very convenient way to get the
station at the "other end" of the satellite link into your
computer. The gridsquare will be displayed with all six
characters, even if you entered only four.

If you know the name of a reasonably large city (large enough to
be in InstantTrack's database of 1794 cities) near the fellow you
want to add, you can just type the name of the city or any part
of the name. InstantTrack will search the city database, and
display a menu of cities that matched the string you typed,
allowing you to select which one you want. For example, if you
type "Fort", the menu will have several entries, including cities
such as: "Fort Worth, TX" and "Fort-de-France, Martinique". If
you have trouble spelling the name of the city -- Is it "Gdansk"
or "Gadansc" or "Gedansik"? -- you can just type "Poland". All
the cities InstantTrack knows about in Poland will be displayed,
and you can pick the one you want.

Or, if you can approximate the spelling, type "%" followed by any
spelling that would sound more or less similar to the actual city
name. InstantTrack will search phonetically. Typing "%gdnsk" for
instance will match Gdansk, "%hewstin" will match Houston.

You can also use a menu of all cities known to InstantTrack by
typing "c". Once in this menu, you may then scroll among the
menu's 50 pages, using the PgUp and PgDn keys, then pick a city
by number.

Finally, if you know the latitude and longitude of the station
you want to add, you can just type them in. Type latitude first,
followed by a slash, then longitude. If he's at the north pole,
for example, you would type 90N/0W . Remember to use the NSEW
letters to specify the correct hemisphere.

The "O" command can also be used to delete a station from the
observer list. After the "O", type "d" followed by the position
in the list of the station you want to delete. You are not
allowed to delete the first station on the list. That's you! The
realtime screens show up to three visiting stations, and these
can be deleted. "D1" would delete the first visitor, etc.


7.6. Understanding The Realtime (Map) Display

The Realtime Map Display is similar to the Realtime Text Display
described above, except that there is a map on the screen, and
less room for text.

Four different kinds of map can be displayed. Two of these
(Cylindrical Equidistant and Orthographic) are maps of Earth. The
third (Orbit-View) is a geometric view of the orbit ellipse and
Earth. The fourth (Sky-View) is a map of the sky, as viewed from
your location.

You may switch among these maps at any time, using the P command.

The color map displays are only available if you have an EGA or
VGA display. The following descriptions apply to the color maps.
If you have a CGA or Hercules (HGC) graphics board, you can get a
monochrome rendition of the maps. See appendix 3 for details.


7.7. Maps of Earth

The map of the world can be displayed in either a Cylindrical
Equidistant or Orthographic projection.

Cylindrical Equidistant is a "rectangular looking" map
projection. It is similar to the Mercator projection, which was
probably what you first used as a child for your first
introduction to geography. This projection has the advantage that
we can display it very quickly, because it always looks the same.

The Orthographic projection is a perspective view of the Earth
from a long distance away. It resembles photographs of Earth
taken from the moon, or an Earth globe held at arm's length. It
has the advantage of a very realistic look and very low
distortion, except near the edges of the globe. It has the
disadvantage that it is much slower to draw, because of the
amount of math required to calculate screen coordinates. This is
the only operation in InstantTrack that's still somewhat slow on
modern computers.

Cylindrical maps are (roughly) centered on 0.0 longitude, unless
you enable scroll mode (by typing S), after which cylindrical
maps will be centered (roughly) on the satellite. By putting the
satellite near the center of the screen, the scrolling mode
minimizing the probability that the satellite footprint will wrap
around the sides of the screen. I am personally more comfortable
with the non-scrolling mode. Take your pick.

These maps show the whole Earth, including approximate boundaries
between countries. Some recent geopolitical changes are not shown
accurately. No political statement is intended!

Displayed on the map are:

1. The observer. (you!) A yellow "x" marks the location of the
observer. An additional yellow "x" marks the location of the
visiting observer, if one has been set. The "x" is red instead of
yellow if it appears against a yellow country.

2. The Sun. A purple dot appears at the "sub-sun point" on the
Earth. If you stood at this point on the Earth, the Sun would be
straight up.

3. The grayline (sometimes called the terminator). This shows
what parts of the Earth are in sunlight. The grayline is drawn in
two shades of purple. The lighter purple is the sunlit side of
the grayline.

4. The satellite. A white dot appears at the "sub-satellite
point" on the Earth.

5. The satellite's geometric footprint. This shows what parts of
the Earth are in view of the chosen satellite. I call it the
geometric footprint because it is determined by geometry alone
(with no consideration of which direction the satellite's antenna
may be pointing). Other programs call this simply "the foot
print". The geometric footprint is drawn in white.

On the Orthographic map, you might wonder why the geometric
footprint is smaller than the whole globe. That's because you are
looking at the Earth from a higher vantage point than the
satellite, much higher in the case of a LEO satellite. The white
line marks the "horizon" seen by the satellite, which depends on
the satellite's altitude.

6. The satellite's antenna footprint. This shows what parts of
the Earth are in the "good" part of the satellite's antenna
pattern. Specifically, this is a line of constant offpointing
angle equal to 20 degrees. (See discussion of offpointing angle
in Understanding the (Text) Display above.) The antenna footprint
is drawn in light blue.

There are several situations in which the antenna footprint is
not drawn..

a. No antenna footprint is drawn if the satellite's "attitude"
has not been set. Some satellites do not have directional
antennas, and others do not have published attitudes. Yet others
have attitudes that InstantTrack doesn't know how to calculate.
If InstantTrack doesn't have all the necessary information to
compute the attitude, it can't display the footprint.

b. No antenna footprint is drawn in the case where the whole area
within the geometric footprint has a "good" offpointing angle.
Think of the antenna pattern as a cone shining down from the
satellite. The antenna footprint is the intersection of this cone
with the Earth. If this cone encloses the entire Earth, there is
no intersection, and the antenna pattern is good everywhere.

c. No antenna footprint is drawn in the case where all area in
the geometric footprint has a "bad" offpointing angle. If the
satellite's antenna points away from the Earth (OSCAR 13 near
perigee, for example), then the antenna pattern "cone" misses the
Earth entirely, then there is no intersection, hence no antenna
footprint, and the antenna pattern is bad everywhere.

It is quite common for only a single arc of the antenna footprint
to be visible. This occurs when the offpointing angle is
moderate, and the "cone" just barely intersects the Earth.

Because the antenna pattern footprint may be a new concept for
you, it may be a little confusing. Don't let this bother you. If
you can't visualize what the antenna footprint means on the
cylindrical map, switch to the Orthographic map, where things
seem to be much more obvious.

7. Groundtrack. This shows the track, on the Earth, that the sub-
satellite point will follow during the next full orbit (or the
next 24 hours, for the Sun and Moon). Only visible if it's been
enabled, via the G command. It can also display more than one
orbit, if the G command is preceded by a digit. In fact, it can
display up to 60 orbits, if the G command is preceded by two
digits. A map display with many orbits displayed can be quite
educational; try "60G" on different kinds of satellites and see
for yourself. (It is possible to run out of free memory when
requesting multiple orbit groundtracks. If this happens, try a
smaller number.)

The sun, satellite, groundtrack, and various footprints are
redrawn from time to time as the satellite, Earth and sun move.


7.8. The Orbit-View

The Orbit-View projection is a simple line diagram showing the
orbit ellipse, and the Earth, drawn to scale. Similar diagrams
can be found in any book on orbital mechanics. The satellite is
shown in its current position on the orbit ellipse, but of course
the satellite is drawn larger than scale!

This view is designed to help you visualize the relative geometry
of the orbit, and the satellite attitude.

The orbit ellipse is drawn as if it were in the same plane as
your computer's display screen, with perigee on the left, and
apogee on the right. The orbit ellipse is white, the Earth is a
brown circle, the main observer (you) is a green "x", and the
satellite is shown as a red dot. The satellite travels
counterclockwise on this ellipse.

If you have set the satellite's attitude, then the direction of
the satellite's antennas is shown with a small light-blue arrow.
Ideally, this blue arrow would point directly at the green x
(your location)! Because this arrow may not lie in the orbital
plane (i.e., Bahn Latitude may not be 0), two additional views of
the orbit appear. These are edge views. The one on the left of
the screen is a view of the orbit from the direction of perigee.
In other words it is as if you bent your head around and looked
at the orbit ellipse from the left side of your screen. The view
on top is similar, as if you viewed the orbit ellipse from the
top of your screen looking down.

At the time I am writing this, OSCAR-10 has an unusual attitude
(62,-26), and is therefore a good example. Select the map screen
by typing 2 at the main menu, then select OSCAR-10 from the
satellite menu, then switch to the orbit view by typing 3P.

A note for students of Celestial Mechanics: In the center view,
the W vector points toward you, out of the screen. In the edge
view on the left, the P vector, and in the edge view at the top
the Q vector points out of the screen.


7.9. The Sky-View

The sky-view projection is a map of the sky from the perspective
of an observer at your location, looking toward the satellite.
The satellite is shown on this map along with the 920 brightest
stars, and possibly the Sun, the Moon, and the horizon, if they
happen to be in view.

The map is a Gnomic projection (which is a fancy way of saying
that it is a perspective projection of the celestial sphere from
the viewpoint of a person at the center of the sphere), with a
field-of-view that extends 100 degrees horizontally, and 60
degrees vertically. The sky-view is always roughly centered on
the satellite.

The satellite is drawn as a red dot. Stars are small white dots,
of various sizes, depending on the magnitude of the star. The sun
(if present) is shown as a big yellow dot. The moon, if present,
is shown as a gray dot. The horizon, if present, is a horizontal
brown line.

If you type "G" for "groundtrack", a light-gray line (a "sky
track") will appear showing the path of the satellite across the
sky for the next orbit (or the next day for the Sun and Moon). If
you type a number (1 to 60) before typing "G", the sky track will
span that number of orbits. If you type "G" again, the sky track
will disappear.

The map is always drawn right-side-up, so stars shown below the
horizon line are, in fact, below the horizon. Such stars are not
blanked, even though you cannot see them through the Earth,
because they will help you recognize constellations near the
horizon.

As an aid in locating the correct portion of the sky on star
charts, etc., the Right Ascension and Declination of the
satellite are shown at the bottom of the screen. (RA and Dec are
coordinates used by astronomers to locate objects in the sky.
They are similar to longitude and latitude, except that they rep
resent locations on the celestial sphere instead of the Earth.)

Like the other maps, the sky-view is automatically updated, as
the Earth turns and the satellite moves.


7.10. Commands on the Map Screen

While in the realtime tracking (map) screen, the following one-
character commands apply:

           space  freeze/unfreeze the display
               C  enable/disable the City dots
               E  look at orbital elements for this satellite
               F  start/stop fast-forward mode
               G  enable/disable ground track display
              nG  enable n-orbits of ground track display
               O  add/delete an observer
               P  change the map projection
              1P  change to cylindrical equidistant
              2P  change to orthographic
              3P  change to orbit-view
              4P  change to sky-view
               R  enable/disable antenna rotor control
               S  toggle scroll mode (for cylindrical map)
               T  set a specific time, or return to realtime.
               U  force an update of the map now.
               V  toggle white-on-black vs. black-on-white (CGA and HGC only)
               W  enable/disable next Rise/Set time calculation & display.
               Q  quit tracking. go back to main menu.
               Z  toggle between local/UTC timezones.
     right arrow  advance to next satellite.
      left arrow  go back to previous satellite.
Ctrl+right arrow  advance to next satellite in this group
Ctrl+ left arrow  go back to previous satellite in this group

When you initially start up the map screen, it will be running in
real time, computing the position of the satellite, Earth, etc.
"right now". There are three commands that can be used to change
this: space, F, and T.

The spacebar simply stops the screen, like the freeze-frame
button on a VCR. Typing the spacebar again pops you back to
realtime.

The T command also produces a screen that stands still, but T
allows you to enter a specific time for which you want the
calculations performed. For example, if you are scheduled to use
OSCAR-10 at 4pm today, and you'd like to see where the Satellite
will be at that time, you can type T, then respond to the prompt
by typing "16:00" followed by Enter. InstantTrack will
immediately calculate and display everything for that specific
time.

At this time prompt, you may enter a date and time using any of
the same formats described under "Setting a Specific Time" for
the real-time text screen, above. Plus, if you have a mouse and a
ground-track or sky-track is visible, you can click on the track
to jump forward to the moment when the satellite will pass
through that place on the track.

Finally, the F command puts the program in a simple fast-forward
mode. This is useful when you want to see where a satellite is
going in the next few minutes or hours. (Actually, you probably
want to see where its footprint, Offpointing Angle, Doppler, etc.
are going.)

When you type F, this screen will start to move ahead in time
steps which are approximately 1/100th of an orbital period for
the chosen satellite. Typing a second F will pop you back to
realtime. The speed of the fast-forward can be controlled from
the IT.INI file; see ITINIDOC.TXT for details.

At the risk of belaboring the explanation, I will point out that
these commands can be used together. You can use T to jump to
next Tuesday, then F to fast-forward from there, and then space
to momentarily freeze the fast-forward.



8. Driving an Antenna Rotor and Radios


InstantTrack will optionally drive an automatic antenna rotor con
troller, to make your antennas track a satellite in real time.

InstantTrack is programmed to communicate with a TSR "rotor
driver" program that follows the interface conventions defined
for the "Kansas City Tracker" (KCT) sold by L.L.Grace
Communications Products (see bibliography). The KCT is a single
board interface that plugs into an IBM PC style ("ISA") slot.
However, the software interface used by InstantTrack is generic,
and can be used to control nearly any kind of hardware. Drivers
for some popular hardware designs are available for download at
http://www.amsat.org/amsat/ftpsoft.html#pc-rot. The driver must
be loaded and run before InstantTrack is run.

When InstantTrack is in one of its realtime screens, the R
command enables or disables realtime rotor control. If
InstantTrack cannot locate a valid rotor driver TSR, it simply
beeps to indicate the error. If InstantTrack finds a rotor driver
TSR, the indication "RotorDRV" appears on the top text line of
the screen, to indicate that InstantTrack is directly
communicating with the rotor driver.

InstantTrack can also work in concert with a TSR program called
OrbitDRV which allows your computer to track satellites and
control your antennas "in the background" while you use your
computer for other things (or visit other screens within
InstantTrack). OrbitDRV is described in detail in the file
ORBITDRV.TXT. An alternate command interface for OrbitDRV is
described in the file ITRACK.TXT. When InstantTrack finds itself
working through OrbitDRV, the indicator "OrbitDRV" appears, along
with the name of the satellite being tracked in the background by
OrbitDRV.

InstantTrack can also work with a radio driver TSR program to
tune your transceiver(s) to compensate for Doppler shift.

The status of the RotorDRV rotator driver, the OrbitDRV
background computation module, and the RadioDRV radio interface
driver can be obtained by selecting "Option Status (TSRs)" from
the Housekeeping menu.



9. Satellite Position Table (Ephemeris)


When you wish to view a table of the position of a satellite at
times in the future (which the astronomers call "an Ephemeris"),
select Satellite Position Table on the main menu by typing "3".
This display is not realtime. It allows you to examine future (or
past) satellite passes.

The display has three formats. The first format displays latitude
and longitude, Doppler and satellite mode information. The second
displays distance and direction to nearest city, so you can
visualize the path the satellite takes over the surface of the
Earth during a pass. The third format displays satellite visual
observability information. You can switch between them by typing
C repeatedly.


9.1. Entering Parameters

You will be asked to select a satellite, using the standard
satellite selection menu. After that, you will be asked for a
starting time, and a time increment. In each case, the program
provides a reasonable default value which you can select by
simply typing the Enter key in response to each question. Start
time defaults to right now, and the time increment defaults to
100 points per orbit (which means the time increments will be
smaller for faster moving satellites).

InstantTrack displays the timezone in the "Starting at" prompt,
but you aren't allowed to enter it yourself. You must use the
timezone InstantTrack displays. There is no means to switch
timezones at this prompt.


9.2. Understanding The Display

The numeric information presented on this display is a subset of
the information on the realtime text display. See explanations in
the text display section.


9.3. Commands

While a table of satellite positions is displayed, you can use
the following commands:

           Enter  display the next page of the table.
               Q  quit tracking. go back to main menu.
     right arrow  advance to next satellite.
      left arrow  go back to previous satellite.
Ctrl+right arrow  advance to next satellite in this group
Ctrl+ left arrow  go back to previous satellite in this group
               C  toggle the display format. (Lat/Lon vs. Cities vs. Visual)
               F  begin/end capturing output to a file (no page headings)
               P  begin/end capturing output to a file (with page headings)
               S  toggle the scroll mode. (Page-at-a-time vs. Scrolling)
               W  toggle the fast rise-time finder on/off.
               Z  toggle between local/UTC timezones.

Most of these commands are self-explanatory. The W command is
here only to help me verify InstantTrack's fast satellite rise-
time finding algorithm. When this is disabled, the indicator
"SLO" will appear in the upper left corner of the screen, and the
program will use the simpler but slower method of stepping time
and recalculating satellite position until the satellite appears
above the horizon. Results should always be the same either way.
The times displayed will be slightly different, because the slow
method has a fixed time granularity of one time step.

When the default fast algorithm is used, the first line of each
pass may show the satellite as slightly below the horizon, even
with an elevation of "-0". This is due to slight precision errors
in the calculation. You can assume that this error is negligible,
and that this represents the moment when the satellite comes over
the horizon.

In the default Page-at-a-time scroll mode, type Enter to see the
next page.

Switching from satellite to satellite doesn't change the other
settings. So if you start with a large time increment (because
you started on a satellite with a high orbit) and then move to
satellite with a low orbit, the results won't be very useful.


9.4 Printing or Capturing to a File

The table of satellite positions can be printed or captured to a
file for later study. Enter your parameters as usual to bring up
the first screen of the table. Type "C" if you like to set the
display format to the one you want.  Type "Z" if you want to
change the timezone. When you're satisfied that the screen
displayed is where you want to start the capture, type "F" or
"P". InstantTrack will prompt you for a file name. Enter the name
of the file you want InstantTrack to create. You may then page
forward in time, change satellites, or whatever you like within
the Satellite Position Table function, and InstantTrack will
capture everything you see (except you can type "C" without
capturing the old display). If you want lots of output, you can
type "S" to enable Scroll mode. When you're done capturing, you
may simply quit the function (type "Q" as usual) or you can type
"F" or "P" again to toggle capture off.

When you type "F" for "File", InstantTrack puts one set of column
headings (just like the ones at the top of the screen) at the top
of the file. It puts another set of column headings into the file
when you've changed a setting that invalidates the old column
headings, but otherwise the rest of the output flows seamlessly
without any additional headings. This mode is probably best for
capturing to a file for later editing or analysis.

When you type "P" for "Printer" or "Paged", InstantTrack puts a
set of column headings on each page of the captured data. This is
most appropriate if you are printing the output. For this to come
out right, you need to tell InstantTrack how many lines your
printer can put on one page. This setting is in the IT.INI
configuration file. See the file ITINIDOC.TXT for instructions on
how to set this parameter. The default value will probably work
for you, but it may leave extra blank space at the bottom of each
page.

You can use either "F" or "P" for capturing to a file. You can
also use either "F" or "P" for capturing directly to a printer.
Use whichever you prefer.

If you don't want a file, but instead want to print the table
directly to the default printer, enter "PRN" for the file name.
You can also enter the special DOS name for the port your printer
is connected to, such as "LPT1" or "LPT2". If your printer is
connected to a serial port, you can enter "COM1" or "COM2", etc.,
provided you've previously used the MODE command to set the baud
rate and other communications parameters. There are a few other
special file names that don't do anything useful here, and you
should avoid using them: "NUL" and "CON" for instance.

If you're on a network (under Windows), you should be able to use
network filenames using the Uniform Naming Convention (UNC)
syntax, as an alternative to mapping a network drive. These
filenames look like \\hostname\dir1\dir2\filename.

If you specify a filename on a floppy disk (like A:\PLAN.OUT) and
you get one of those annoying "Abort, Retry, Fail?" errors, you
can choose any of the three reponses. If you choose Abort (by
typing "A"), InstantTrack will immediately exit. If that's not
what you want, you should probably choose Fail instead (by typing
"F"). In that case, InstantTrack will tell you it failed (but you
knew that already) and ask for a new filename. If you can correct
the problem (such as by inserting a floppy disk), do so and
choose Retry (by typing "R"). If things are now working,
InstantTrack will pick up and continue as if nothing had gone
wrong.

There is one other setting in the IT.INI configuration file
pertaining to your printer. The setting printer_formfeed_at_end
controls whether InstantTrack sends one last formfeed (new page
eject) to the printer at the end of each job. You probably need
to set this to "1" under DOS, because most printers will hold
onto the last partial page of output until the computer sends a
formfeed. If you're running under Windows or OS/2, you probably
want to set it to "0". Just closing the file is enough to force
the last page out of the printer under those environments. If you
find you're getting a blank sheet at the end of every job, change
this setting from "1" to "0". If you find you're not getting the
last partial page of output until you print something else,
change this setting from "0" to "1".

If you are moving rapidly from satellite to satellite using the
arrow keys, the capture file or printout will only contain as
much of each satellite as InstantTrack had time to compute and
put on the screen before you switched to another satellite. The
other lines on each screen, though still blank, will also appear
in the output.

This function captures plain ASCII text, in DOS format.
Exception: the degrees symbol on the R.A./Declination version of
the display is not a standard ASCII character and may not look
right on your printer. No attempt is made to do anything fancy
with the printer, so it should be compatible with any printer
that can print plain text files. If you have a PostScript
printer, printing directly from InstantTrack may or may not work,
depending on the printer and its settings. If you have a printer
that only works under Windows, but you're not running Windows
right now, then it probably will not work. In that case, capture
to a file, and use your usual procedures for printing to print
the file.



10. The Satellite Schedule Display


This display provides you with a quick indication of when
satellite operations may be possible. The schedule shows you when
a satellite will be above the horizon as viewed from your
station. If you have entered a satellite schedule for this
satellite (in the satellite database), then the satellite
operating mode will also be shown whenever the satellite is up.

There are three different forms of the schedule display. You can
display a single satellite for 20 days, or 20 satellites on a
single day, or a single satellite for a single day from the
viewpoint of several observers.

You will be prompted for the starting date and time. As with all
time prompts in InstantTrack, you may enter date or time, or both
date and time. You may also type neither, in which case starting
time will default to right now.

If you have asked for a single-satellite schedule, you will then
select a satellite on the satellite selection menu. If you have
asked for a multiple-satellite schedule, you will be prompted
for the name of a satellite group. If you do not enter a group
name, the group will default to *, (i.e., all satellites). Groups
are explained in the section on Satellite Parameters.

If you've asked for the multiple-observer schedule, you will be
prompted to select the observers. The current observer list will
be displayed, and you will be allowed to edit it. As with other
places in InstantTrack where you can specify an observer, this
prompt accepts city names, callsigns, gridsquares, lat/lon, or S
or C to pull up the full station or city menus. When you are done
editing the observer list, type the Enter key.


10.1. Understanding The Display

In the first form, each day is shown as a row on the display.
Each column indicates a 20 minute period during the day. A
portion of the display looks like this:

Satellite: Oscar-13        Station: N6NKF

                           Hours UTC
        0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 ... 23
01/21/90------------oooBBBBBBJJJBBBBB-------------- ... --
01/22/90------------------BJJJ----------B---------- ... --
01/23/90----------------BJ----------BBBB----------- ... --


In the second form, each satellite is shown as a row on the
display.  A portion of the display looks like this:

  Day: 01/21/90              Station: N6NKF

                            Hours UTC
         0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 ... 23
 Sun     ------------******************************* ... --
 Moon    -*************************----------------- ... --
 Oscar 13------------oooBBBBBBJJJBBBBB-------------- ... --

In the third form, each observer is shown as a row on the
display.  A portion of the display looks like this:

  Day: 01/21/90              Satellite: Oscar-13

                          Hours UTC
          0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 ... 23
  N6NKF   --------------oBBBBBBJJJBB----------------- ... --
  N4OUL   ------oooooooooBBBB------------------------ ... --
  9Q5EE   --------------------BJJJBBBBBBBBBBB-------- ... --

A green "-" indicates that the satellite is below the horizon.
Any yellow character indicates that the satellite is above the
horizon. If you have entered a schedule for this satellite, then
these characters will correspond to the operating mode. If you
have not entered a schedule, then "*" is used to indicate above
horizon.

Even though the display only has room for three columns per hour
(one point every 20 minutes), this display will reliably indicate
the presence of satellite passes as small as 1 minute!

As with other displays, yellow and green are used to indicate
above and below the horizon. I have carefully avoided use of
special characters which might not appear properly on a printer.
After the schedule is complete, use Shift-PrtSc to capture a copy
to your printer.

To try something familiar, display a schedule for the moon.

The idea for this display format came from a program written by
John Mezak, K2RDX.


10.2. Commands

During the schedule display, the following commands apply...

       Z      toggle between local/UTC timezones.
       Q      quit the schedule. go back to main menu.
     Enter    go to next day



11. The Satellite Covisibility Display


Some satellites have the capability of establishing a
communications link directly with another satellite. This is
called a crosslink. Crosslinks are only possible when one
satellite can "see" the other, i.e., when the Earth doesn't get
in the way of the direct line-of-sight path from one satellite to
the other satellite. This display shows you, in realtime, which
satellites "see" which satellites, i.e., where crosslinks are
theoretically possible. Crosslinks are possible an amazingly
large fraction of the time.

There is growing interest in recent years in very small
communications satellites in low Earth orbit (LEO). These are
cheaper to build and launch than large satellites, and many can
be launched at one time. The AMSAT Microsat project has designed
a very small (9" cube) amateur radio digital communications
satellite. A disadvantage of low Earth orbit is that any one low
satellite can see a very small fraction of the Earth's surface at
any time, making long distance communication impossible. The
AMSAT Microsat overcomes this difficulty by operating in a store-
and-forward mode. An alternative solution would be to design
microsats with crosslink capabilities.

Looking forward to the day when amateur satellites will support
crosslinks, this display tells you when such crosslinks are
possible.


11.1. Understanding The Display

The display is a matrix. Each row and column represents a
satellite. There is a small green dot at the intersection of any
row & column if the two satellites cannot see each other, and a
big yellow dot if they can.

Unfortunately, only 20 rows and 58 columns of this matrix fit on
the screen at any one time. The four arrow keys scroll the
display in various directions so you can see any part of the
entire 200 x 200 matrix.

Two additional columns on the left are labeled "O" and "S". These
stand for "Observer" (that's you), and "Sun". Dots in the O
column indicate whether the satellite named to the left is
visible to you at the present time. Dots in the S column indicate
whether the satellite named to the left can see the sun.

A dot next to the date and time in the upper left of the screen
blinks once every time that the computer has recomputed the
positions of all the satellites and updated the display.


11.2. Commands

      arrow keys     cause scrolling, so you can view
                     selected portion of the covisibility display.
                     
               Z    toggle between local/UTC timezones.
               
               Q    quit this screen.



12. Setting Time via NIST



12.1. What is NIST ACTS?

NIST ACTS is the Advanced Computer Time Service provided by the
US Government National Institute of Standards & Technology. The
NIST Time Service presently uses an ordinary phone number in the
303 area code (Colorado), and there's an alternate number in the
808 area code (Hawaii). The only cost of using the service is the
cost of a very quick long-distance call. More information is
currently available at
http://www.boulder.nist.gov/timefreq/service/acts.htm.


12.2. Procedure

To set your computer's DOS clock via NIST ACTS, select
"Housekeeping Functions" at the main menu, then "Update Time
(NIST via modem)" at the Housekeeping Menu.

InstantTrack will tell your modem to dial, and all characters
exchanged between the modem and computer will be displayed on the
screen. NIST sends one time-stamp every second. As soon as
InstantTrack has correctly received two time stamps in a row, it
will hang up the phone, and tell you the results. An example
session follows. At any time during the modem dialog, you can
type any key, and the program will hang up the phone and exit
immediately.

A sample session...

    --- Modem dialog follows --- Type any key to abort. ---
    ? = HELP
    National Institute of Standards & Technology
    Telephone Time Service
                            D  L D

     MJD  YR MO DA  H  M  S ST S UT1 msADV         OTM
    47511 88-12-16 06:03:44 00 0 -.1 045.0 UTC(NIST) *
    47511 88-12-16 06:03:45 00 0 -.1 045.0 UTC(NIST) *

    --- Setting DOS Date & Time to local: 12/15/1988 22:03:44 ---
    --- Your DOS time was ahead of NIST by 5.22 seconds ---
    --- Info only: Your hardware real time clock reads:
12/15/1988 22:04:44 ---
    --- Done --- Phone call duration was 20.4 seconds. ---


Note that your DOS clock is set to your "local" time zone,
controlled by your setting of the "TZ" environment variable or
settings in the IT.INI configuration file. This is described
earlier in this document.

The "Info only" line about your hardware realtime clock (RTC) is
only printed if you have an IBM AT, or a machine with an AT-
compatible BIOS. The RTC is the device that remembers time of day
when your computer is turned off. InstantTrack reads the AT RTC,
but does not attempt to set it. It makes no attempt to read or
write the large variety of different third-party aftermarket RTCs
that are present in many IBM PC's and XT's.

The average phone call duration is about 20 seconds. If there is
phone line noise that garbles some of the characters, it will
take a little longer. InstantTrack contains a timeout to prevent
excessively long phone calls. This is initially disabled, but may
be enabled by setting the nist_maxtime parameter in the IT.INI
file to some number of seconds other than zero. NIST provides a
timeout which hangs up the phone at their end after 55 seconds.


12.3. What Can Go Wrong?

The most common thing that can go wrong is that your modem may
require different commands than the one I've provided, or you may
have your modem on a different COM port. You may edit the
configuration file IT.INI to correct these problems. Please read
instructions in ITINIDOC.TXT before editing IT.INI.


12.4. Technical Notes on Dialing modems

One of the challenges when writing any program that attempts to
dial and interact with a modem is the very large variety of
different brands and models of modems in use. They all support a
slightly different set of commands, and handle the various RS-232
modem control signals in a slightly different way. Furthermore,
there are an amazing number of different ways that RS-232 cables
can be wired.

Most commercial communications programs for DOS (Crosstalk,
MIRROR, ProComm,...) solve this problem by providing a large
number (as many as 20) different configuration files which tell
the program how to interact with each different kind of modem.
These differences include the command set, handling of modem
control signals (which are required, and which are provided by
the modem), handshake timing, call progress indications, etc.

I've taken a different approach.

I've written serial I/O routines which are completely oblivious
to the state of the RS-232 modem-control signals. If your modem
happens to not provide one of the modem-control signals, or uses
one of them in an unusual way, InstantTrack doesn't care. (The
standard IBM BIOS, on the other hand, requires that the modem
raise DSR and CTS.) For outgoing modem-control signals, I raise
DTR and RTS, which hopefully, will satisfy all modems that care.
(The standard IBM BIOS raises DTR, but then toggles RTS, de
pending on whether you are reading or writing to the serial
port.)

I've also provided an initialization file, IT.INI, where you can
specify the exact character strings that should be sent to your
modem to dial and hang up. The Hayes-type commands that I've in
cluded by default will probably work with most modems, but if you
require something different, you can just change it.

The program also raises DTR and RTS before dialing, and drops
them after dialing. Some modems hang up the phone in response to
a falling DTR instead of a command.

Finally, while most commercial programs attempt to interact with
the call progress indications (i.e., detection of dial-tone, busy
signal, etc.) provided by most modern modems, I have ignored them
completely. I simply dial, then wait for characters from the
modem that look like the NIST format. This has the disadvantage
that if anything goes wrong during the call (say, for example, a
busy signal) this program will simply wait until its timeout
occurs. A program that listens for the call-progress info from a
modem would know what had happened immediately, and tell you.
This simple-minded approach has the advantage that it is
compatible with a wide variety of modems, and it has not yet been
an inconvenience. I have yet to get a busy signal from NIST!  You
can, of course, immediately abort a call at any time manually, by
typing any key on the keyboard.


12.5. If It Doesn't Work for You .

Nevertheless, experience shows that you may have trouble getting
the Update Time feature to work. If you are running under
Windows, you probably should not struggle with this feature of
InstantTrack for very long. Instead, download one of the many
easy-to-use programs available for this purpose and use that
instead. In addition to Windows programs that use NIST ACTS and
other, similar services, there are programs that use your
Internet connection to set your computer's clock.



13. Non-numerical Geography: Maps, Cities and Gridsquares


Traditionally, satellite tracking programs have indicated the
position of a satellite by displaying two numbers: latitude and
longitude. I don't know about you, but I don't immediately
recognize a location, or its distance from me or other known
locations, when presented with latitude / longitude coordinates.
InstantTrack uses three more human-friendly methods..

Maps

Of course, pointing at a map is the most user-friendly way to
specify a location. InstantTrack contains a map of the world, and
a map of the sky, both of which are described above under the
heading "Understanding the Realtime (Map) Display".

Cities

InstantTrack contains a database of the names and locations of
1794 cities worldwide. About half of these cities are in the
United States, and the other half scattered around the rest of
the world. Data for U.S. cities were obtained from magnetic tapes
available from the U.S. Geological Survey. The selection criteria
for U.S. cities was population. West of 99W longitude, all cities
>20,000 pop are included. East of 99W longitude, all cities
>32,000 pop are included. I typed in the data for non-U.S. cities
from atlases and other reference books.

Gridsquares

The Grid Locator System, or gridsquares, (in Europe it's called
the Maidenhead Locator System, after the place where a meeting
was held to standardize it) is used by amateur radio operators.
It is simply an encoding of latitude and longitude into a four or
six character string. It's quicker to say "DM12it" over the radio
than "I'm at 32.817 degrees North latitude, 117.267 degrees East
longitude". See Tyson's article in QST. It's listed in the
bibliography. Or see http://www.arrl.org/locate/gridinfo.html.



14. Files used by InstantTrack...


Computer readable files used by InstantTrack:

                  IT.EXE    This is the executable program.
                  
                  ITNCP.EXE Alternate executable program if you
                            have No math CoProcessor.
                  IT.ORB    Library of satellite orbital elements.
                  IT.QTH    Library of station elements.
                  IT.CTY    Library of 1794 city locations worldwide.
                  IT.MP?    Maps of Earth.
                  IT.STR    Map of 920 bright stars.
                  IT.HLB    Text for the online help screens.

Human readable files that come with InstantTrack:

     ITMANUAL.PDF The documentation file you are now reading (formatted)
     ITMANUAL.TXT The documentation file you are now reading (plain text)
     
     ITUPDATE.TXT Information about changes to InstantTrack.
     
     ITWISH.TXT   Wish list of requested improvements to InstantTrack.
     
     ITINIDOC.TXT Documentation describing the IT.INI file.
     
     IT.INI       Configuration parameter file.
     
     INTSPEC.TXT  Information for programmers on interfacing to InstantTrack.
     
     SINCE100.PDF Describes the changes since Version 1.00 (formatted)
     SINCE100.TXT Describes the changes since Version 1.00 (plain text)


Related programs:

     DUMMYKCT.COM   Sample (dummy) rotor driver TSR program.
     
     ITRACK.EXE     Command-line user interface for OrbitDRV.
     
     ITSORT.EXE     Utility for manipulating the InstantTrack
                    satellite database.
                    
     ORBITDRV.EXE   Background tracking TSR option for InstantTrack.
     
     ORBITNCP.EXE   Alternate background tracking TSR if you have
                    No math CoProcessor.
                    
     TEST63.EXE     Test program to evaluate Interrupt 0x63 on your computer
     

Documentation for related programs:

     ORBITDRV.TXT The documentation file for OrbitDRV.
     ORBITDRV.UPD Information about changes to OrbitDRV.
     ITRACK.TXT   The documentation file for ITRACK.
     ITRACK.UPD   Information about changes to ITRACK.
     ITSORT.TXT   The documentation file for ITSORT.
     ITSORT.UPD   Information about changes to ITSORT.

Generally, all the computer-readable files should be placed in
the same directory, and IT should be run while connected to that
directory.

If you wish to run InstantTrack while connected to directories
other than the one in which you have placed these files, you
should define a DOS environment variable named INSTANTTRACK, and
make it point at the directory containing the InstantTrack files.

Example: SET INSTANTTRACK=D:\it

You may also wish to put the directory containing the
InstantTrack .EXE files in your PATH definition, so that DOS will
know where to find them when you type IT or ITNCP.

Example: SET PATH=C:\bin;D:\it



Common Questions and Answers


These are questions and comments I often receive about
InstantTrack, and the associated answers:

Question: Why don't you interface to the Heathkit "Most Accurate
Clock"?

Answer: Calls to NIST cost me about $0.15 each (from San Diego to
Colorado) in the evening. So if I called NIST every day of the
year for a period of five years, the total cost would be $273.75
. (Of course, I would never expect you to call that often!) The
Heath clock costs over $400, so it won't pay for itself, even
after five years of daily use!

Question: I can't afford the memory space for the TSRs. What can
I do?

Answer: Here are some ideas...

1. There are several public domain programs that will allow you
to load and unload TSRs at will. Possibly one of those could help
you.

2. If you're running a 286-based machine, and you have EMS
(expanded) memory, there are utilities such as "Headroom"
commercially available which can move some TSRs into EMS memory.
Some InstantTrack users have successfully used Headroom to move
TSRs (including OrbitDRV) to EMS memory. They swear by it. Users
of Headroom tell me it's a complex program, so you really need to
read the manual carefully.

3. If you're running on a 386-based machine or higher, there are
utilities such as "386-MAX" or "QEMM 386" commercially available
that can move all of your drivers and TSRs into extended or
expanded memory. Later versions of MS-DOS included some of these
capabilities built-in. Look up the LOADHIGH command in your DOS
5.0 or later manual.

Question: The program bombed and printed out all this stuff on my
screen. What the heck is it?

Answer: InstantTrack is written in a style where assumptions that
the program makes about its internal data are tested at critical
places even though "logically" these assumptions must be correct.
This is known as "defensive programming". This approach does not
guarantee that the program will be bug free! It does make
problems easier to detect, and it makes the task of finding the
cause of a problem a bit easier once the problem is detected.

No doubt, you have seen programs that malfunction in subtle ways,
producing incorrect output, or crashing your computer when you
stumble onto a bug. The goal here was to never do that. If
something is wrong, my hope is that it will be detected by one of
the "assertion" tests that I've written into the program. So far,
about 99.9% of the time, that's exactly what happens. If you
stumble on one of these, then a "stackdump" will appear on your
screen. It looks like this.:

   Assertion failed: satp != NULL in file keprmenu.c at line 329
   Stackdump Follows...

       keprmenu.c: set_sat_elem
       keprmenu.c: elem_manual_set
       actmenu.c: action_menu
       it.c: main
   Abnormal program termination

The first line tells me what assertion failed, exactly where in
the program, and the stackdump tells me how I got there.

If you stumble onto a bug in InstantTrack, and a stackdump like
this appears on your screen, please hit the Shift/PrtSc, or
whatever key on your computer makes a screen dump on the printer,
slip it into an envelope, and send it to me. If you're one of the
first to report a bug your name or callsign will appear next to
the bug description in the IT.UPD file in future versions.

Question: My modem doesn't hang up the phone after InstantTrack
calls NIST to update time. What do I do to fix this?

Answer: InstantTrack does two things to hang up the phone. Get
either one of these mechanisms working right, and the modem
should hang up properly.

First, InstantTrack sends a command to your modem to tell it to
hang up the phone. By default, this command is "ATH". Some modems
need this command changed to "ATH0". Some modems may need yet a
different command. Read the documentation that came with your
modem. (If your modem didn't come with any technical
documentation, complain to the manufacturer or check the
manufacturer's web site.) You can then edit the IT.INI file to
tell InstantTrack to use a different command.

Second, InstantTrack drops the DTR signal (Data Terminal Ready)
at the end of the phone call. This should tell most modems to
hang up.  Unfortunately, lots of modems ignore the DTR signal
unless you tell them otherwise. On some modems you do this by
moving a dip switch. On most modern modems it's a software
command. Read the documentation that came with your modem. Look
for a discussion of the Data Terminal Ready signal.

If you figure out how to enable DTR on your modem, but then the
modem doesn't work at all, check your modem-to-computer cable.
Make sure the cable actually has a wire to carry the DTR signal!
It's on pin #20 of a 25 pin RS-232 cable.

Question: Why isn't the Earth round in the orthographic
projection? On my screen it looks like a watermelon.

Answer: Most EGA/VGA monitors are supposed to "autosize" when the
EGA or VGA card switches modes. Some don't do it right. Some
monitors have switches that control autosizing. Sometimes these
switches are on the back, and sometimes they're on the front,
under a hidden panel. (My monitor has some switches on the back,
and some under a panel on the front!) You might just have one of
these obscure switches in the wrong position.

On a real true-blue IBM computer, and on any EGA/VGA setup where
autosize works correctly, the Earth should be round.

Question: Can I run InstantTrack under DESQView? How do I set up
DESQView to make this work?

Answer: InstantTrack will run under DESQView. The secret is to
set up the DESQView parameters for InstantTrack so that DESQView
gives InstantTrack enough memory, and knows that InstantTrack
will write to the screen directly.

Pull up the "change a program" screen in DV, and set the
following parameters:

     Memory size (in K): 450
     Writes directly to screen: [Y]
     Displays graphics Information: [Y]

Then hit the F1 key, to go to the "Change a program -- Advanced
Options" screen, and set the following parameters...

     Starting Height: 25         Starting row...: 00
     Starting Width.: 80         Starting column: 00

     Uses its own colors:  [Y]
     Uses math coprocessor:[Y]

Question: What do I do if InstantTrack seems to freeze sometimes
when I use my mouse?

Answer: Unfortunately, some versions of the Microsoft mouse
driver contain bugs that may cause this. Specifically, several
users have observed these symptoms while using version 7.00,
7.01, 7.02, or 7.03 of MOUSE.COM. Earlier versions seem to work
flawlessly, and version 7.04 seems to work for most people. Call
Microsoft customer service if you need to obtain a copy of the
7.04 version of the mouse driver.

In the meantime, here's a workaround: When the program appears to
freeze, it's actually only the screen that's frozen. You can
still type commands.  Usually typing the U command twice gets
things working again.

Question: What do I do if little "mouse droppings" are left
behind when I move the mouse on the map screen?

Answer: Some versions of the Logitech mouse driver can cause
this. If you have a Logitech mouse, contact Logitech for an
upgrade to the latest version of their mouse driver.

Question: What do I do if I get the message "Overlay Not Found" ?

Answer: The most common cause of this message is an infection by
the Jerusalem B virus. Get a virus checker program, and test all
your disks for a possible virus infection.

Question: How accurate are the Moon predictions?

Answer: The maximum error is approximately 0.05 degrees, more
than good enough for moonbounce.



15. Copyright Notice and Distribution Policy


This program is Copyright 1989 - 2000 Franklin Antonio and Paul
Williamson, All Rights Reserved.

Copies of InstantTrack are distributed in the United States from
AMSAT-NA, a non-profit organization which constructs and launches
amateur radio satellites. When you obtain a copy of InstantTrack
from AMSAT-NA, the entire donation goes toward the amateur radio
space program.

InstantTrack is distributed in the United Kingdom by AMSAT-UK,
and in Australia by AMSAT-Australia, and in Germany by AMSAT-DL.
Address information for the AMSAT organizations can be found in
the bibliography.

Any distribution of InstantTrack requires a license.



16. No Warranty


No warranty is expressed or implied. This software has been
written as an amateur hobby effort, and I will only support it at
that level. You are encouraged to report bugs however.



17. Acknowledgments


I've borrowed most of the good ideas from other tracking programs
I've used. Namely, the W0SL tracking program written by Roy Welch
(W0SL), which is a derivative of the W3IWI Orbit program by Tom
Clark (W3IWI), and of course, QuikTrak(tm) by Bob McGwier (N4HY).
The idea for the compact schedule display came from John Mezak
(K2RDX). All the code in InstantTrack, however, is my own.

Paul Williamson (KB5MU), provided extensive assistance testing
version 1.00 of this program. Paul also wrote the "TSR" part of
OrbitDRV, and all of ITRACK and DUMMYKCT. Other beta-testers of
version 1.00 included Mike Brock (WB6HHV), Dave Guimont,
(WB6LLO), Steve Wilmet (WB6BDY), Harry Bluestein (N6TE), Ross
Forbes (WB6GFJ), John Fail (KL7GRF), Glenn Moody (N4OUL), Vern
Hajek (K6UGS), Chuck Dowling (KI6TG), Graham Ratcliff (VK5AGR),
Steve Roberts (N4RVE), Courtney Duncan (N5BF), Ron Broadbent
(G3AAJ), Tom Lafleur (KA6IQA). Steve wrote a review of
InstantTrack in the November 89 issue of 73 magazine.

Paul Williamson (KB5MU) is now the primary maintainer of
InstantTrack and has created this new release version. The voice
"I" in this document is usually Franklin, but sometimes Paul.



Appendix 1 -- Example Satellite Element File Formats



NASA Format

This is the format used by NASA to distribute satellite elements
in their "NASA Prediction Bulletin". The origin of the format is
unknown. Some old NORAD reports refer to this as T-card format.
NASA documents often call it the "2-line" format.

InstantTrack expects a file which contains groups of 3 lines: One
line containing the satellite's name, followed by the NASA 2
lines of numbers.

Files of this format are distributed by T.S.Kelso to nationwide
computer networks, and end up on BBS's and electronic mail
systems around the country. You can find T.S.Kelso's element sets
on http://www.celestrak.com.

NASA leaves some fields out of some element sets. The
"international designators" for example are often missing.
InstantTrack checks for this, and uses the new designator only if
it's really there. (If there's a nonblank character in line 2
column 10, I assume the designator is valid, and read it in.)

NASA format files look like this...

OSCAR 10
1 14129U          88230.56274695 0.00000042           10000-3 0  3478
2 14129  27.2218 308.9614 6028281 329.3891   6.4794  2.05877164 10960
GPS-0008
1 14189U          88230.24001475 0.00000013                   0  5423
2 14189  63.0801 108.8864 0128028 212.9347 146.3600  2.00555575 37348

Each number is in a specified fixed column. Spaces are
significant. The last digit on each line is a mod-10 check digit,
which is checked by the program. The program also checks the
sequence numbers (first column), and checks each orbital element
for reasonable range. This is a very good set of checks, so this
format is very safe, and robust.

I have noticed recently files of "almost NASA format" elements on
some BBSs. Specifically, some people have been leaving off the
check digits, and adding commentary to the first line. There is
no excuse for this. We can only exchange data if we adhere to
standards. An almost NASA format file is no better than a
diskette that's "almost" the right size to fit in that little
slot in the front of your computer.

The following description, which I obtained from T.S.Kelso,
describes the NASA format in detail:

Data for each satellite consists of three lines in the following
format:

AAAAAAAAAAA
1 NNNNNU NNNNNAAA NNNNN.NNNNNNNN +.NNNNNNNN +NNNNN-N +NNNNN-N N NNNNN
2 NNNNN NNN.NNNN NNN.NNNN NNNNNNN NNN.NNNN NNN.NNNN NN.NNNNNNNNNNNNNN

Line 1 is a eleven-character name.

Lines 2 and 3 are the standard Two-Line Orbital Element Set
Format identical to that used by NASA and NORAD. The format
description is:

Line 2
Column     Description
 01-01     Line Number of Element Data
 03-07     Satellite Number
 10-11     International Designator (Last two digits of launch
           year)
 12-14     International Designator (Launch number of the year)
 15-17     International Designator (Piece of launch)
 19-20     Epoch Year (Last two digits of year)
 21-32     Epoch (Julian Day and fractional portion of the day)
 34-43     First Time Derivative of the Mean Motion divided by 2.
        or Ballistic Coefficient (Depending of ephemeris type)
 45-52     Second Time Derivative of Mean Motion divided by 6.
           (Blank if N/A)
 54-61     BSTAR drag term if GP4 general perturbation theory was used.
           Otherwise, radiation pressure coefficient.
 63-63     Ephemeris type
 65-68     Element number
 69-69     Check Sum (Modulo 10)
           (Letters, blanks, periods = 0; minus sign = 1; plus sign = 2)


Line 3
Column     Description
 01-01     Line Number of Element Data
 03-07     Satellite Number
 09-16     Inclination [Degrees]
 18-25     Right Ascension of the Ascending Node [Degrees]
 27-33     Eccentricity (decimal point assumed)
 35-42     Argument of Perigee [Degrees]
 44-51     Mean Anomaly [Degrees]
 53-63     Mean Motion [Revs per day]
 64-68     Revolution number at epoch [Revs]
 69-69     Check Sum (Modulo 10)

All other columns are blank or fixed. Note that the International
Designator fields are usually blank, as issued in the NASA
Prediction Bulletins.


AMSAT Format

There are several very similar formats generated by several
different people that seem to be called "AMSAT" format. I have
tried to make InstantTrack compatible with all of them. This
format is very user-friendly, and can be easily read and/or
edited by humans. Spaces are not significant. Each orbital
element must appear on a separate line. The order in which
orbital elements appear is not significant, except that each
element set should begin with a line containing the word
"satellite". This file format optionally contains a checksum as a
separate line at the end of each element set.

InstantTrack searches each line of the file for several possible
keywords, and a correctly formatted number. One nice implication
of this is that additional information, as long as it is carried
on additional lines (commentary, information about satellite
schedule, etc.) can be added to these files, and it will not
bother InstantTrack. Each orbital element is checked for correct
range, and element sets containing out-of-range elements are
discarded.

InstantTrack expects a blank line to appear between the
information for each satellite and the next satellite. That's how
it knows when the information for each satellite is finished.

First example AMSAT format, as distributed by Conrad Kirksey
W5BWF:

   Satellite: AO-10
   Int'l Object Number: 14129
   NASA Designation: 1983-058B
   Epoch Time, T0: 88239.30510271
     Fri Aug 26, 1988.
   Epoch Rev, K0: 1114
   Mean Anomaly, M0: 6.0030 deg
   Mean Motion, N0: 2.05882335 rev/day
   Inclination, I0: 27.1492 deg
   Eccentricity, E0: 0.6027104
   Arg Perigee, W0: 331.5568 deg
   RAAN, O0: 307.6972 deg
   Period:  699.428632 min/rev
   Increment:  174.857158 deg/rev
   Beacon, F1: 145.8100 MHz
   Decay, N1: -1.38E-06 rev/day^2
   Element Set: 352

Second example AMSATish format, as distributed in an ARRL
bulletin...

   KEPLERIAN BULLETIN 77   ARLK077
   FROM ARRL HEADQUARTERS
   NEWINGTON CT  SEPTEMBER 24, 1988
   TO ALL RADIO AMATEURS

   Satellite: oscar-10

   Catalog number: 14129
   Epoch time:      88248.53312992
   Element set:     353
   Inclination:       27.1605 deg
   RA of node:       306.2255 deg
   Eccentricity:    0.6029797
   Arg of perigee:   333.9978 deg
   Mean anomaly:       5.4273 deg
   Mean motion:    2.05877131 rev/day
   Decay rate:        4.4e-07 rev/day sq
   Epoch rev:            3933

Both of these formats, and many other similar ones, will be read
correctly. Since the AMSAT format is not precisely defined,
however, I cannot guarantee that everything anyone might call
"AMSAT" format in the future will work.



Appendix 2 -- Bugs, Problems and Futures


AT&T 6300 Computers:

Users of AT&T DOS 3.2 have noticed that when they use
InstantTrack to set DOS time from NIST, time may be incorrect by
up to one minute. This is due to a bug in AT&T DOS. The DOS
function which sets DOS time ignores the "seconds" field, and
always sets seconds to 00.

STB VGA Cards:

Some users of STB VGA cards have had a problem where the map
screens appear to overwrite the menu screens. They've reported
that the problem can be solved by obtaining an upgraded version
of the VGA BIOS EPROM chip from STB.

Microsoft Mouse Driver version 7

See discussion in the Questions and Answers chapter.

Logitech Mouse Drivers

See discussion in the Questions and Answers chapter.

Mouse vs. DESQView

Some users have had trouble running InstantTrack under certain
versions of DESQView, wherein multiple applications fight over
the mouse. If you do have this problem, you tell InstantTrack to
ignore the mouse by starting IT up with the /M switch, i.e., IT
/M or ITNCP /M .

See ITUPDATE.TXT for information about recent changes, etc.

As with any project this large, the product is never complete.
There are more good ideas than time to implement them. I had to
stop somewhere, and the result is the present release.

I make no commitment about future versions, however I do have a
long wish list of ideas which I hope can be implemented in future
versions of InstantTrack. Users have provided me with a long list
of things I could have done better. Fixing isn't as much fun as
implementing new features, but some of this work might happen
too.

Stay tuned.



Appendix 3 -- Video Adapters (MDA/CGA/HGC/EGA/VGA)


There are many different video adapter boards used in PCs these
days. Here is a discussion of how InstantTrack supports each of
these. InstantTrack automatically detects which kind of display
you have, so can usually run InstantTrack without worrying about
what kind of display you have. There are a few exceptions, and
these are noted below.

MDA -- Monochrome Display Adapter

This is the oldest and simplest, and doesn't support graphics.
You can use InstantTrack in any of the text screens, but you
won't get maps. You might consider upgrading to an HGC or clone
of same.

CGA -- Color Graphics Adapter

This is the oldest kind of color graphics board for the PC.
InstantTrack does display maps on a CGA, but they appear in a
single color. You can also use InstantTrack in any of the text
screens. If you have one of the old CGA boards that makes "snow"
when a program writes to it quickly, be prepared for snow with
InstantTrack.

HGC -- Hercules Graphics Card (HGC or HGC+)

This is a monochrome graphics card. (Clones of the Hercules card
are sometimes called MGC's in fact.) InstantTrack supports
Hercules cards. You will get all the text, and all the maps, but,
of course, you won't get any color.

To use InstantTrack with a Hercules card, you must first load
Microsoft's Hercules graphics driver program MSHERC.COM, which is
provided with InstantTrack. MSHERC is a TSR, i.e., a program that
stays resident, so you need only load it once, each time you
reboot your computer. You may wish to load it from within your
AUTOEXEC.BAT file.

Because of a quirk in MSHERC.COM, it must be loaded after your
mouse driver (if you have a mouse, that is).

InstantTrack was designed assuming a color display, and the
documentation repeatedly refers to the colors of various objects
on maps. If you are using a monochrome card, you'll have to
simply ignore the references to color. More difficult to ignore,
InstantTrack relies heavily on color to help you distinguish
various objects on map screens, so InstantTrack is more difficult
to use on a monochrome display.

I urge you to try InstantTrack on a color display, if you have a
chance, because the difference is like the difference between
night and day!

EGA -- Extended Graphics Adapter

This is the display which InstantTrack was originally designed
for. Everything works. Maps are displayed using the 350x640 16-
color graphics mode.

This mode may cause compatibility problems on newer computers,
since support for EGA modes is not high on the priority list for
hardware designers anymore. There is a setting in the IT.INI
configuration file that will solve some of these problems, by
forcing InstantTrack to use the BIOS for character output. If you
have trouble with text on the map displays, see the ITINIDOC.TXT
file for information on the force_bios_chargen_g setting in
IT.INI.

VGA -- Video Graphics Array

The VGA can do everything the EGA can do, and a little more.
InstantTrack will display maps using the 480x640 16-color
graphics mode. However, you have the option of switching to a
lower resolution map mode if you want.

You can (optionally) change graphics resolution by modifying a
parameter in the IT.INI file. The parameter is named
vga_resolution. Set it to 1 for 350x640, and to 2 for 480x640.
This parameter has no effect if you do not have a VGA. See the
file ITINIDOC.TXT for more on the IT.INI configuration file.

In addition, you can force the VGA to display everything in
shades of gray, and you can control exactly which shades of gray
are used. This can be useful for a monochrome display, such as an
older laptop LCD. See the file ITINIDOC.TXT for information on
changing this parameter in the IT.INI configuration file.

And, if you have problems with text on the map screens, you can
try the force_bios_chargen_g setting in the IT.INI configuration
file. See the file ITINIDOC.TXT for details.

Advantages: 480x640 resolution maps look nicer.

Disadvantages: 480x640 resolution maps are a bit slower to draw,
and they require about 32K more memory. If you have a slow
computer, or are short of memory, you might want to stick with
the lower resolution maps.



Bibliography...


The Radio Amateur's Satellite Handbook, by Martin R. Davidoff,
     K2UBC 1998, published by ARRL, 225 Main St., Newington, CT
     06111 This is an excellent introduction to amateur radio
     satellites, basic orbital mechanics, operating procedure,
     etc., and is highly recommended.

Methods of Orbit Determination, by Pedro Escobal, 1965, corrected
     reprint 1973, published by Krieger Publishing, and John
     Wiley & Sons. ISBN 0-88275-319-3. This is the best orbit
     mechanics book I have found. Fairly technical and expensive,
     but logically organized, understandable, and complete. This
     book piqued my interest in Celestial Mechanics again, after
     many years of neglect.

Celestial Mechanics: A Computational Guide for the Practitioner
     by Laurence J. Taff, 1985, published by John Wiley & Sons.
     ISBN 0-471-89316-1 This book provides a refreshingly candid
     assessment of computational techniques. Taff makes his
     opinions clearly known, in a style atypical of most
     textbooks. Lots of good material here. Not suggested as a
     first text on the subject, however.

"Bahn Coordinates Guide -- Satellite Orbits", by Phil Karn
     (KA9Q), AMSAT Satellite Journal, Jan-Feb 1986, pp 8-11.
     Describes the coordinate system that AMSAT uses to describe
     satellite attitude.

"Conversion Between Geodetic and Grid Locator Systems", by Edmund
     T. Tyson, QST Magazine, January 1989. This article gives a
     clear explanation of the grid locator system.

"The Satellite Sky", published by Air & Space, Smithsonian
     Institution, Washington DC, 20560, ISSN-0886-2257. This is a
     21" x 34" poster, listing over 250 satellites, and their
     name, purpose, owning nation, launch site, launch date,
     altitude, etc. Communications, Weather, Photo Recon,
     Electronic Surveillance, Navigation, Earth Sensor, and
     Research satellites are listed. Amateur radio satellites are
     not.

The RAE Table of Earth Satellites 1957-1986, compiled at The
     Royal Aircraft Establishment, Farnborough, Hants, England,
     by D.G. King-Hele, et al. Published in the U.S. by Stockton
     Press, New York. ISBN 0-333-39275-2. I've also seen it
     listed as ISBN 0-935859-05-5. This book lists 17000 objects
     from 2869 launches (many of the objects are fragments), with
     name, designation, launch date, estimated lifetime, mass,
     shape, dimensions, and basic orbital parameters. Expensive!
     Probably can be found in the reference section of your local
     college library.

Observing Earth Satellites, by Desmond King-Hele, 1966,
     MacMillan. Available from Sky Publishing Co. (the people who
     publish Sky & Telescope magazine) This 200 page book tells
     you all about visually observing satellites. Somewhat dated
     but the basic ideas are still correct.

Artificial Satellite Observing, by Howard Miles, 1974, American
     Elsevier. Contains information similar to that in King-
     Hele's book.

"Your Window for Visually Observing Satellites" by Vern
     Riportella, WA2LQQ, in QEX magazine, #77, July 1988,
     published by American Radio Relay League, 225 Main St.,
     Newington, CT 06111. Nice introductory article on criteria
     for visual observability of satellites.

Artificial Space Debris, by Nicholas L. Johnson & Darren S.
     McKnight, 1987, Orbit Book Co., Inc, Krieger Publishing Co.,
     Melbourne FL, 111 pages, ISBN 0-89464-012-7, $34.50 "Only 5
     % of the 7,000 trackable objects in orbit are functioning
     satellites." Nifty book on the debris pollution of near-
     Earth space.

"A Non-Cosmetic Improvement to the W3IWI Tracking Algorithm" by
     Bob McGwier, N4HY, in AMSAT-NA Technical Journal, V1 #1,
     Summer 1987. (Available from AMSAT-NA) Describes a
     computational technique for quickly finding a satellite's
     rise time. Strong mathematical content.

AMSAT-NA -->   The Radio Amateur Satellite Corporation (AMSAT)
               850 Sligo Avenue, Suite 600
               Silver Spring, MD  20910-4703
               Phone: +1(301) 589-6062
     This is a North American non-profit group that builds and
     launches amateur satellites. They have a variety of
     materials useful to anyone learning about amateur radio
     satellite operation. They publish the bimonthly "AMSAT
     Journal". Please consider becoming a member of AMSAT-NA.

AMSAT-UK -->   AMSAT-UK
               40 Downsview
               Small Dole
               West Sussex BN5 9YB
               U.K.
               Phone: +44(0)1273 495733
     This is a U.K. non-profit group similar in purpose to AMSAT-
     NA. They publish a very good newsletter "OSCAR News" once
     every two months, and publish other material useful to
     beginners.

AMSAT-Australia ->  AMSAT-Australia
               G.P.O. Box 2141
               Adelaide 5001
               AUSTRALIA
               Phone: (08) 297 5104
     This is an Australian non-profit group similar in purpose to
     AMSAT-NA.

Project OSCAR -->   Project OSCAR
               P.O. Box 6700
               San Mateo, CA  94403
     This group publishes "The OSCAR Letter", containing
     information about amateur radio satellites, and also
     distributes amateur satellite related software written by
     hams in other countries. Subscribe by sending $10. and six
     #10 SASE to Project OSCAR.

OSR   -->      Harlan Technologies
               5931 Alma Dr.
               Rockford, IL  61108-2409
     These folks publish "OSCAR Satellite Report", a four page
     newsletter which comes out every two weeks. Best print
     source for up-to-the-minute information about status of
     Amateur Radio satellites.

NIST  -->      NIST-ACTS
               National Institute of Standards & Technology
               Time and Frequency Division
     
          Mail Stop 52
               325 Broadway
               Boulder, CO  80303
     These people run the NIST ACTS telephone time service. Send
     any questions or comments about that service to them. These
     folks used to be known as the "National Bureau of
     Standards".

KCT  -->       L. L. Grace Communications Products
               P.O. Box 1345
               Voorhees, NJ 08043
               (609) 751-1018
     This company manufactures the "Kansas City Tracker". I have
     no affiliation with L.L.Grace. Send any questions regarding
     the KCT to them.

Authors-->     Franklin Antonio, N6NKF
               2765 Cordoba Cove
               Del Mar, CA  92014
               n6nkf@amsat.org


               Paul Williamson, KB5MU
               5331 Channing Street
               San Diego, CA  92117-3206
               kb5mu@amsat.org

InstantTrack was originally written by Franklin Antonio, and this
     update was prepared by Paul Williamson. Both authors welcome
     your constructive comments about this software. Make sure
     you've read this manual before you write! If you write to
     us, please use email if at all possible. If you can't do
     that, please write a (paper) letter. If you would like a
     response, please enclose a self-addressed stamped envelope.
     We get lots of letters & phone calls from users of
     InstantTrack. I would much rather receive a letter from you
     than a phone call, and I am much more likely to reply to a
     letter if you've enclosed a SASE. But email is best of all.



                           finis
